Section A

Identification Information
Intent

This section contains personal identifiers necessary to identify the person and link
sequential assessments in an electronic medical-record system.

A1.

Name

Definition

Person's legal name.

Coding

Use printed letters. Enter in the following order:
Ala. Given name
Alb. Middle initial
Ale. Family name
Aid. Jr./Sr.

If the person has no middle initial, leave Item Alb blank. Likewise, leave Item Ald
blank if appropriate.

A2.
Definition

Process

Coding

Gender
Person's gender identity. For most persons, this will be their biological sex that was
identified at the time of their birth. For some persons, it will be based on a gender
identity arrived at later in life.
A person's biological sex plays an important role in treating certain health condi­
tions and is a potential protective/risk factor. It can be used to predict health-related
issues and outcomes. The same can be said for the person's self-representation of
their gender. Ask the person, "What is your sex?" Code based on self-report. If the
person cannot communicate, ask the family.
Use the code "3" for "Other gender identity'' for persons who do not identify them­
selves solely as male or female. This includes persons who consider themselves to
be non-binary.
1 Male
2 Female
3 Other gender identity

Section A Identification Information

9

Al.

Birthdate

Coding

For the month and day of date of birth, enter two digits each. Use a leading zero
("O") as a filler if a single digit. Use four digits for the year. Example: November 1,
1942.

4

2

Year

Month

Day

A4.

Marital Status

Intent

To record the person's current marital status based on the country's legal frame­
work.

Definitions

"Married" includes persons of the same or opposite sex who are legally married
through either a religious ceremony or civil union. The prevailing country law can
impact on designating a person as married. For example, in a few U.S. states, "mar­
ried" includes people in a common-law marriage as part of a couple of the same
or opposite sex who have lived together in a conjugal relationship for a designated
number of years. Thus, in those states "Never married" refers to persons who have
never been married or in a common-law marriage throughout their entire life
course. If the person is in a long-term same-sex or opposite-sex relationship that is
not legally recognized as a marriage or common-law marriage, code the item "3"
for "Partner/significant other''.

Coding

Choose the answer that describes the current marital status of the person.
1 Never married
2 Married
3 Partner/significant other

4 Widowed
5 Separated

6 Divorced

AS.

Departmental Client Number (DCN)

Intent

To record the Medicaid identification number.

Process

This number will auto populate from the case record. Ensure the number is accu­
rate.

Coding

Confirm the auto populated number is accurate.

A6.

Disregard-this item not utilized in Missouri

A7.

Disregard-this item not utilized in Missouri

10

Section A Identification Information

A8.

Reason for Assessment

Intent

To document the key reason for completing the assessment.

Coding

Enter the number corresponding to the reason for assessment.
I Initial assessment-An assessment that is done at the time of enrollment, or
when initially determining eligibility for home care services.
2 Reassessment-A regularly scheduled follow-up assessment to ensure that the

care plan is appropriate and current.

A9.

Assessment Reference Date

Intent

To establish a common temporal reference point for the assessment being com­
pleted.

Definition

The designated end point of the observation period for all information collected on
the assessment. Except where otherwise noted, all information gathered about the
person pertains to the 3-day period prior to and including the Assessment Refer­
ence Date for items pertaining to the person's status or performance.
Home care assessments are usually completed using information gathered during
a single visit. However, when an assessment carries over to a second visit, informa­
tion for the remaining interRAI HC items must be for the time period established
by the original Assessment Reference Date.

Coding

For the month and day of the assessment, enter two digits each. Use a leading zero
("0") as a filler if a single digit. Use four digits for the year. Example: May 8, 2022.
The period of observation for 3-day items includes May 6-8.
2
Year

2

�
Month

�
Day

A10.

Person's Expectations (Goals) of Care

Intent

It is essential to ask the person being assessed to identify what his or her goals
of care might be. By doing so, the assessor encourages the person to be an active
member of the health care team. This can also be a starting point to develop a
person-centered plan of care or services. It opens a channel of communication to
help the assessor better understand what the person expects or hopes to experience
as a home care client. Because the person's view may change over time, this item is
included both in the initial and in subsequent reassessments.

Process

Use this box to document outcomes that the person hopes to achieve as a result
of receiving assistance. These outcomes may relate to almost anything, including
improved functional performance, a return to health, increased independence, an
ability to maintain community residence, improved social relations, etc.
Talk to the person and phrase your inquiry in the most general way possible. For
example, ask: "I'd like to know why you are applying for services;' "What benefits do
you expect to get from this program?" "Tell me about changes in yourself you hope
will occur:' Encourage the person to express personal goals in his or her own words.
On follow-up reassessments, ask: "Are you satisfied with your care experience, or
would you like changes in how you live or are cared for?"

Section A Identification Information

11

Some persons will be unable to articulate a goal, an expected outcome, or even a
reason for seeking services. They may say they do not know or that they are getting
service at the request of a relative. All of these are reasonable responses. Do not
make inferences based on what you or other clinicians believe should be goals of
care. If the person asks you for clarification on what he or she might expect from
services, follow your usual agency policy.
Coding

Use the large ("open text") box to record the person's verbatim response. Code the
person's primary goal of care in the single line of boxes at the bottom, entering one
letter in each box. Abbreviate if necessary. Enter "NONE" if the person is unable to
articulate a goal of care.
B

E

s

u

R

E

T

A

K

E

M

E

D

s

A11.

Postal/Zip Code of Usual Living Arrangement [Country
Specific]

Definition

The postal or zip code for the community address where the person usually resides.
For those persons being evaluated while in an acute care hospital, rehabilitation
hospital or unit, post-acute unit, o r nursing home, this would be the community
address of the person's usual living arrangement prior to his or her transitory stay
in the current setting.

Process

Talk to the person or family member. Review the person's admission or transmittal
records as necessary.

Coding

Enter one digit per box, beginning with the leftmost box. If the four-digit code
extension is unavailable, leave the extra four digits blank. For example, Roslindale,
MA 02131 should be entered as follows:
,.._o

2

1

3

1__. - .__ _.___..___..____.
I I

___,___
___,___
___,___
_.__

A12.

Residential/Living Status at Time of Assessment

Intent

To document the person's community living arrangement at the time of the cur­
rent assessment. The person's living arrangement may be long-standing or relatively
new or even transitional in character (for example, maybe one of the agency goals is
to find a better location).

Process

Ask the person or family if you are unsure of where the person is currently living, or
consult the person's records, driver's li cense, or other documentation.

Coding

Choose only one answer and enter the appropriate code in the box provided. If the
code is a single digit, leave the first box empty.
1 Private home/apartment/rented room -Any house, condominium, apart­
ment, or room in the community, whether owned or rented by the person or
another party. Also included in this category are retirement communities and
independent housing for older adults or persons with disabilities.

12

Section A Identification Information

2 Assisted living/semi-independent living/board and care-A non-institutional
community residential setting that integrates a shared living environment with
varying degrees of supportive services of the following types: supervision,
home health, homemaker, personal care, meal service, transportation, and
so on.
3 Mental hea lth residence-A community residential setting for adults with
mental health problems who need supervision and limited services (meals,
housekeeping). For example, psychiatric group home.
4 Group home for persons with physical disability-A setting that provides
services to persons with physical disabilities. Typically, persons live in group
settings with 24-hour staff presence. Individuals are encouraged to be as inde­
pendent and active as possible.
5 Setting for persons with intellectual disability-A setting that provides ser­
vices to persons with intellectual disabilities. Typically, persons live in group
settings with 24-hour staff presence but individuals are encouraged to be as
independent and active as possible.
6 Psychiatric hospital/unit-A hospital that focuses on the diagnosis and treat­
ment of psychiatric disorders and which is separate from other inpatient facili­
ties, such as an acute care, rehabilitation, or continuing care hospital. A psychi­
atric unit is a care unit, located in a general hospital, which is dedicated to the
diagnosis and treatment of psychiatric disorders.
7 Homeless (with or without shelter)-A homeless person does not have a
fixed residence (a house, apartment, room, or other place to stay on a regular
basis). The person may live on the streets, or outside in wooded or open areas.
The person may sleep in cars, in abandoned buildings, or under bridges, for
example. Persons who are homeless may or may not take advantage of existing
homeless shelters.
8 Long-term care facility (nursing home)-A licensed health care facility that
provides 24-hour skilled or intermediate nursing care. For example, you may
use this code for someone who resides in a long-term care facility at the time of
the assessment (no matter how long the stay), but for whom the continued stay
is expected to be temporary and there is an expectation of an imminent transfer
to a community setting.
9 Continuing care hospital/unit-A type of longer stay recuperative/rehabili­
tative hospital or unit.
10 Rehabilitation hospital/unit-A licensed rehabilitation hospital that focuses
on the physical and occupational rehabilitation of persons who have experi­
enced disease or injury with subsequent decline in physical function. A reha­
bilitation unit is located within an acute care hospital and focuses on the acute
rehabilitation of persons who have experienced disease or injury with subse­
quent decline in physical function.
11 Hospice facility/palliative care unit-A hospice facility (or unit within a facil­
ity providing more general care) provides care to persons who have a terminal
illness with a prognosis of less than 6 months to live as certified by a physician.
The goal of hospice care is to provide comfort and quality of life while assist­
ing the person and family. Palliative care is the care of persons whose diseases
are not responsive to curative treatments. It targets pain and symptom relief,
without precluding use of life-prolonging treatments. Palliative care is often
provided from the time a person is diagnosed with a life-threatening illness.
(continued)

Section A Identification Information

13

(continued)

12 Acute care hospital/unit-A facility licensed as an acute care hospital that
focuses primarily on the diagnosis and treatment of acute medical disorders.
13 Correctional facility-Any jail, penitentiary, or halfway house operated by a
local, state, or federal government to care for and house persons who have been
sentenced to incarceration by a criminal court.
14 Other -Any other type of setting not listed above.

A13.

Living Arrangement

Intent

To record whom the person lives with and the duration of this arrangement. These
items will help the assessor determine the need for more, fewer, or different services
and supports.

Process

Ask the person or family member.

A13a.

Lives with

Coding

Record the code that reflects whom the person is living with presently. Exclude any
temporary living arrangements made while home care services are being set up.
Choose only one answer and enter the appropriate code in the box provided.
1 Alone-Includes person who lives only with a pet, lives on the streets, or is
homeless (whether or not the person uses shelters).
2 With spous e/partner only-Includes spouse/partner, girlfriend or boyfriend,
common-law marriage, or long-term same-sex relationship.
3 With spouse/partner and other(s)-Lives with spouse or partner and any
other individual(s), whether family or unrelated.
4 With child (not spouse/partner)-Lives with child(ren) only, or with child(ren)
and other individual(s), but not with spouse or partner.
5 With parent(s) or guardian(s)-Lives with parent(s) or guardian(s) only, or
with parent(s) or guardian(s) and other individual(s), but not with spouse or
partner or child(ren).
6 With sibling(s)-Lives with sibling(s) only, or with sibling(s) and other indi­
vidual(s), but not with spouse or partner, child(ren), or parent(s) or guardian(s).
7 With other relative(s)-Lives with a relative (such as aunt or uncle) other than
spouse or partner, child(ren), parent(s), or sibling(s).
8 With nonrelative(s)-Lives in a group setting (for example, a boarding home,
long-term care facility, group home, or jail) or in shared accommodation with
nonrelative(s) (for example, roommate). Excludes single overnight stays, such as
in a homeless shelter.

A13b.

Person or relative feels that the person would be better off living
elsewhere

Process

Ask the person and family member/caregiver separately whether either believes
there should be a change in living arrangements. Be sensitive to how the question
is raised. Variants on the question "Do you believe the person would be better off

14

Section A Identification Information

living elsewhere?" might include asking whether the person would be happier/less
isolated living elsewhere, would have his or her needs met better, would be safer, or
would have access to more nutritious meals.
Coding

Code for the most appropriate response. If either the family member or the person
respond that it would be better to move, code "l" or "2" as appropriate.
0 No

1 Yes, other community residence
2 Yes, in non-community living setting (long-term care facility)

Section A Identification Information

15

Section B

Intake and Initial History
NOTE: This section is completed only when the first interRAI HC Assess­
ment is completed. It provides basic information about the person that is not
expected to change during the person's involvement with the agency.
81.

Date Case Opened (This Agency)

Intent

To document the date the person's case was initiated by the agency.

Process

Enter the date when the person was first referred to the agency. If the care agency
did not receive a referral, enter the date when the person first became known to
the agency as needing an assessment. If the person was transferred from another
agency, the date would be the date of transfer. The record is likely to be the most
reliable source of this information.

Coding

Fill in the boxes with the appropriate number. Do not leave any boxes blank. If the
month or day contains only a single digit, fill the first box with a "O'. For example,
if the care agency received a referral from the primary care provider on March 14,
2022, the date should be entered as:
2

2

Year

Month

Day

82.

Ethnicity and Race [Country Specific]

Intent

To document the person's race and ethnicity per established standards.

Process

Ask the person or family member which of the categories below best describes the
person's race and ethnic background. The person may identify more than one cat­
egory.

Coding

For each option that applies, enter "l" for "Yes''. For options that do not apply, enter
"O" for "No�
Ethnicity-Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish Orig in
B2a. Mexican, Mexican American, Chicano
B2b. Puerto Rican
B2c. Cuban
B2d. Other-e.g., Salvadoran, Dom inican, Colombian, Guatemalan, Spaniard,
Ecuadorian, etc.
(continued)

Section B Intake and Initial History

17

(continued)

Racial Group Identification(s)
B2e. American Indian or Alaska Native
B2f. Asian
B2g. Black or African American
B2h. Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander
B2i. White
83.

Primary Language [Country Specific]

Intent

To record the person's preferred language for day-to-day communication. Caregiv­
ers must be able to communicate with the person in a language he or she under­
stands. Information about the person's language may indicate the need to consider
interpretation services.

Definition

Preferred language for day-to-day communication.

Process

Observe and discuss with the person and family to determine the primary language
the person speaks or understands.

Coding

Code for the most appropriate category.
1 English
2 Spanish
3 French
4 Other

84.

Interpreter Needed

Intent

To document whether the person requires the assistance of an interpreter to com­
municate with others.

Process

Observe and listen to the person. If still unsure, first review clinical records (if avail­
able). If necessary, check with family or referral source to determine the need for an
interpreter. Item B3 ("Primary Language") indicates the person's primary language
and thus the language required for an interpreter, if needed.

Coding

0 No
1 Yes

18

Section 8 Intake and Initial History

BS.

Residential History over the last 5 years [Missouri Item]

Intent

This item is one indication of personal vulnerability. For example, persons with a
prior long-term care facility stay have a higher likelihood of a subsequent stay.

Definition

a. Long term care facility ( e.g., nursing home)-A licensed health care facility
that provides 24-hour skilled or intermediate-level nursing care.
b. Board and care home, assisted living-A non-institutional community resi­
dential setting that integrates a shared living environment with varying degrees
of supportive services of the following types: supervision, meal service, transpor­
tation, etc.
c. Mental health residence -e.g., psychiatric group home -A residential setting
for adults with mental health problems who need supervision and limited ser­
vices (meals, housekeeping).
d. Psychiatric hospital or unit-A hospital that focuses on the diagnosis and
treatment of psychiatric disorders and which is separate from other inpatient
facilities, such as an acute, rehabilitation or chronic hospital. A psychiatric unit is
a dedicated care unit located in a general hospital that is dedicated to the diagno­
sis and treatment of psychiatric disorders. This category also includes state and
federal psychiatric hospitals.
e. Setting for persons with intellectual disability-A setting that provides
services to persons with intellectual disabilities. Typically, such persons live in
group settings with 24-hour presence of staff. Persons are encouraged to be as
independent and active as possible

Process

Ask the person and caregivers. Review any available documentation.

Coding

Code for all settings the person lived in during the 5 years prior to the date the case
was opened [item Bl]
0 No
1 Yes

Section B Intake and Initial History

19

Section C

Cognition
It is essential to determine the person's actual performance in remembering, mak­
ing decisions, and organizing daily self-care activities. These are crucial factors in
many care planning decisions, in part because of their impact upon the person's
ability to follow instruct ions and treatment regimens, and to make independent
decisions in the community.
A recommended approach for assessing cognitive items is to:

■ Engage the person in general conversation to help establish rapport- for
example, ask the person to tell you about him- or herself.

■ Actively listen and observe for clues to help you structure your assessment.

Remember that repetitiveness, inattention, rambling speech, defensiveness,
or agitation may be challenging to deal with, but provide important informa­
tion about the person's cognitive function.

■ Be open, supportive, and reassuring during your conversation with the person

(for example, "Do you sometimes have trouble remembering things? Tell me
what happens. We will try to help you:').

■ If the person becomes agitated, reassure him or her and stop discussing issues

related to cognitive function. Because cognitive function and memory can
be sensitive issues, the person may become defensive, agitated, or very emo­
tional. Say to the agitated person, "Let's talk about something else now" or
"We don't need to talk about that now:' Observe the person's cognitive per­
formance over the course of the assessment.

After eliciting the person's response, it may be necessary to follow up with the per­
son's family or paid caregivers to clarify or validate information regarding the per­
son's cognitive function over the last 3 days. Consultation with others is especially
important for people with limited communication skills or with language barriers.
(1.

Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making

Intent

To record the person's actual performance in making everyday decisions about the
tasks of daily living. These items are especially important for further assessment
and care planning in that they can alert the assessor to a mismatch between a per­
son's abilities and his or her current level of performance, as the family may inad­
vertently be fostering the person's dependence.

Definition

Here are some examples of decision-making tasks:

■ Choosing items of clothing;
■ Knowing when to eat meals;
■ Knowing and using space in the home appropriately;
■ Using environmental cues (such as clocks or calendars) to organize and plan
the day;

Section c Cognition

21

■ In the absence of environmenta l cues, seeking information appropriately (that
is, not repetitively) from others in order to plan the day;

■ Using awareness of one's own strengths and limitations in regulating the day 's
events (for example, asking for help when necessary); and

■ Making prudent decisions concerning how and when to go out of the house;
where applicable, acknowledging the need to use a walker or other assistive
device and using it routinely.
Process

Interview and observe the person, and then consult with a family member or other
caregiver. Review the events of each day. The inquiry should focus on whether the
person is actively making decisions about how to manage tasks of daily living,
not whether the caregiver believes that the person m ight be capable of doing
so. Remember that the intent of this item is to record what the person is doing
(actual performance). When a family member takes decision-making responsibil­

ity away from the person regarding tasks of everyday living, or when the person
chooses not to participate in decision making (whatever his or her level of capabil­
ity may be), the person should be considered as having impaired performance in
decision making.

Coding

Enter the single number that corresponds to the most correct response. If the per­
son receives a score of "5", do not complete the rest of Section C or any of Sections
D, E, or F; instead, skip directly to Section G.
0 Independent- The person's decisions in organizing daily routines and making

decisions were consistent, reasonable, and safe (reflecting lifestyle, culture, val­
ues).

1 Modified independence -The person made reasonable and safe decisions in

familiar situations, but experienced some difficulty in decision making when
faced with new tasks or situations only.

2 Minimally impaired -In specific recurring situations, decisions were poor or

unsafe, with cues/supervision necessary at those times.

3 Moderately impaired-The person's decisions

were consistently poor or
unsafe; the person required reminders, cues, or supervision at all times to plan,
organize, and conduct daily routines.

4 Severely i mpaired-The person never (or rarely) made decisions.
5 No discernible consciousness, coma -The person is nonresponsive. (Skip to

Section G.)

(2.

Memory/Recall Ability
NOTE: If the person received a score of "5" ("No di scernible consciousness,
coma") on Item Cl, do not complete Items C3-C7 or any of the items in Sec­
tions D, E, or F. Instead, proce ed directly to Section G.

Intent

22

To determine a person's ability to remember recent and past events (short-term and
situational memory).

Section C Cognition

C2a.

Short-term memory OK

Definition

Seems, appears to recall after 5 minutes.

Process

Conduct a structured test of short-term memory (for the preferred approach, see
the following "Example"). If this is not possible, ask the person to describe a recent
event that you should both have knowledge of (for example, the election of a new
political leader, a major holiday) or that you can validate with a family member (for
example, what the person had for breakfast) . If there is no positive indication of
memory ability, score thi s item "l" for "Memory problem'!

Coding

Code for recall of what was learned or known.
0 Yes, memory OK
1 Memory problem

Example of a Structured Approach for Assessing
Short-Term Memory
Ask Lhe person to remember Lhree unrelated items (such as book, walch, and table) for a
few minutes. After you have stated all three items, ask the person to repeat them to you
(to verify that you were heard and understood by the person). Then proceed to talk about
something else, perhaps by going on lo another part of the assessment. Do not be silent;
do not leave the room. In 5 minutes, ask the person to repeat the name of each item. for
persons with verbal communication deficits, nonverbal responses arc acceptable (for ex­
ample, when asked to point to items that are to be recalled, he or she can do so}. If the
person is unable to recall all three items,
Code: C3a = "1" = "Memory problem".

C2b.

Procedural memory OK

Definition

Can perform all or almost all steps in a multitask sequence without cues.

Process

Coding

This item refers to the cognitive ability needed to perform sequential activities.
Dressing is an example of such an activity, as multiple steps are required to com­
plete the entire task. The person must be able to perform or remember to perform
all or most of the steps in order to be scored "0" for "Memory OK''. If the person
demonstrates difficulty in two or more steps, code as "l" for "Memory problem'.
Remember that persons in need of care in the home often have physical limita­
tions that impede their independent performance of activities. Do not confuse such
physical limitations with the cognitive ability (or inability) to perform sequential
activities.
Code for recall of what was learned or known.
0 Yes, memory OK
1 Memory problem

Section c Cognition

23

C2c.

Situational memory OK

Definitions

Both recognizes caregivers' names/faces frequently encountered (includes formal
and informal caregiver) AND knows the location of places regularly visited (bed­
room, dining room, activity room, therapy room). Note: Activity rooms and therapy
rooms can be present in senior housing or other congregate living environments.
Recognizes caregiver names and faces -The person distinguishes caregivers
(informal and formal) from others (for example, other family members, strangers,
visitors, and friends). It is not necessary that the person remember all the names
of all caregivers, but rather that the person can recognize them as caregivers (for
example, home health aide, nurse, therapist, the daughter who helps three days a
week) versus others.
Remembers the location of places regularly visited- The person is able to locate
or recognize key areas to which he or she regularly goes (for example, find the way
to his or her room, recognize the purposes of particular rooms such as the kitchen
or family room). It is not necessary for the person to know the street number of the
house or apartment, but he or she should be able to find the way to his or her room,
recognize the purposes of particular rooms, etc.

Process

This two-part measure of orientation assesses the person's cognitive ability to rec­
ognize both people and places. To be coded as OK, the person must both recog­
nize the names/faces of frequently encountered family members or caregivers AND
know the location of places regularly visited (bedroom, dining room, places visited
outside the home).

Coding

Code for recall of what was learned or known.
0 Yes, memory OK
1 Memory problem

Examples of How to Code Memory/Recall Ability
Mrs. L is a 90-year-old former librarian who became a home care client 2 days ago, after
being discharged from a rehabilitation hospila l fo r conlinued occupational and physical
therapy following surgical repair of a hip fracture. During the assessment, Mrs. L was
articulate about her recent health history (including the names of the acute and rehabili­
tation hospilals, orthopedic surgeon, and primary nurses). She enumerated her current
medication list and when the medications were to be taken and reported that she did this
activity without help. She introduced her n,vo visiting daughters to the assessor by name.
She also provided a brief social history. This information was validated as accurate via a
conversation with her daughters, a review of the hospital discharge summary, and a review
of the labels on the medication bottles.
Code: C2a (Short-term memory OK) = "O" = "Yes, memory OK".
Code: C2b (Procedural memory OK) = "0" = "Yes, memory OK".
Code: C2c (Situational memory OK) = "0" "' "Yes, memory OK".

Mr. l is a 63-year-old divorced man with a 30-year history of alcohol abuse. Three weeks
prior to intake into the home care pl'ogram, Mr. 1 passed oul while smoking in bed in
his rented room, sustaining second-degree burns on his left ear, neck, and chest. He was

24

Section c Cognition

admitted to an acute care hospital for treatment of burns, smoke inhalation, and del iriwn
tremens. He was transferred to a nursing facility 13 days ago and spent 10 days in a recu­
perative state.
During the admission assessment lo the home care program, which occ urred 2 days
after his discharge from the nursing home, Nlr. I was able to recall the fire but was sketchy
on the details of his hospitalization and treatment. lie was unable to recall any of the three
items posed to him during a test of his short-term memory. Mr. I did relay inforrnation
about his early li(e, including his LO-year marriage, the names of his three sons from whom
he is now estranged, and his prior work as an accountant (informat ion validated as accu­
rate from his medical record). Mr. I has been able to recognize the faces of those providing
care to him in the home and knows their roles (the nurse and the "therapist"). He also can
find his way around his home, can remember his rehabilitation schedule, and prepares and
eats lunch with no help from others.
Code: C2a (Short-term memory OK) = "l" = "Memory problem".
Code: C2b (Procedural memory OK) = "0" = "Yes, m emory OK".
Code: C2c (Situational memory OK) = "0" = "Yes, memory OK".

(3.

Periodic Disordered Thinking or Awareness

Intent

To record behavioral signs that may indicate that delirium is present.

Definitions

Frequently, delirium (an acute confusional state) is caused by a treatable illness such
as an infection or a reaction to medications.
The characteristics of delirium are often manifested behaviorally and therefore
can be observed. For example, disordered thinking may result in rambling, irrel­
evant, or incoherent speech.
A recent and perhaps rapid deterioration in cognitive function is likely indicative
of delirium, which may be reversible if detected and treated in a timely fashion.
Signs of delirium can be easier to detect in a person with intact cognitive function
at baseline. When a person has a pre-existing cognitive impairment or pre-existing
behaviors such as restlessness, calling out, etc., detecting signs of delirium is more
difficult. Despite this difficulty, it is possible to detect signs of delirium by being
attuned to recent changes in the person's usual functioning. For example, a person
who is usually noisy or belligerent may suddenly become quiet, lethargic, and inat­
tentive (hypo-active delirium). Conversely, one who is normally quiet and content
may suddenly become restless and noisy (hyperactive delirium). Many affected per­
sons may fluctuate and exhibit both forms of delirium over time. Or, a person who
is usually able to find his or her way around the house may begin to get "lost:'
C3a. Easily distracted-For example, episodes of difficulty paying attention;
person gets sidetracked.
C3b. Episodes of disorganized speech -For example, speech is nonsensica l,
irrelevant, or rambling from subject to subject; person loses train of thought.
C3c. Mental function varies over the cou rse of the day-Sometimes better,
sometimes worse; behaviors sometimes present, sometimes not.

Process

Section c Cognition

Ask the person or others who know the person if any of the behaviors have been
noticed over the last 3 days. If the response is yes, determine whether the behavior
is different from the person's usual functioning.

25

Coding

Code for the person's behavior in the last 3 days regardless of what you believe the
cause to be, focusing on when the manifested behavior first occurred and whether
it is different from the person's usual pattern.
0 Behavior not present
1 Behavior present, consistent with usual functioning
2 Behavior present, appears different from usual functioning -For example,
new onset or worsening; different from a few weeks ago.

Examples of How to Code Periodic Disordered
Thinking or Awareness
Tom was observed to have episodes of rambling speech on 2 of lhe last 3 days. This behav­
ior has been present for some time, and its frequency has not changed. It occurs during the
day and evening; Tom generally sleeps through the night. He is able to attend to conversa­
tions wiU1 his caregiver, however.
Code: C3a (Easily distracted ) = "O" = "Behavior not present''.
Code: C3b (Episodes of d isorganized speech )= "1 " ::: "Behavi or present, consistent
with usual functioning".

Code: C3c (Mental function varies over the course of the day) = "0" = "Behavior
not present".
Mr. Smith has been observed to be picking at his clothing when he is spoken to and ram­
bles incoherently whenever he is awake. These are new behaviors, according to his family.
Code: C3a (Easily distracted ) = "2" = "Behav ior present, appears different from
usual func tioning".
Code: C3b (Episodes of d isorganized speech) = "2'1 = ''Behavior present, appears
different from usual func tioning".
Code: C3c (Mental function varies over the course of tbe day) = "O" = "Behavior
not present''.

C4.

Acute Change in Mental Status from Person's Usual
Functioning

Intent

To determine if a person has experienced a rapid, unexpected deterioration of his
or her mental status, because this can be an indication of possible delirium.

Definition

Any sudden or recent change in the person's usual level of functioning; such changes
may include restlessness, lethargy, being difficult to arouse, or altered environmen­
tal perception.

Coding

0 No

1 Yes

26

Section c Cognition

cs.

Change in Decision Making as Compared to 90 Days Ago
(or Since Last Assessment If Less Than 90 Days Ago)

Intent

To compare the person's current decision-making ability to that of 9 0 days ago (or
since the last assessment, if less than 90 days ago). The changes may be permanent
or temporary, and the cause may be known (for example, psychotropic medica­
tion or new pain) or unknown. If the person is newly admitted to the program,
include changes since admission and changes during the period prior to admission.
Note: Some persons may have experienced an intermittent change in status but this
should not be considered in the assessment. Consider only their current status as
contrasted with their status 9 0 days ago.

Process

Talk to the person and family members. Ask them to compare the person's decision­
making status now versus 9 0 days ago (or since the last assessment if less than 9 0
days ago). To help identify the 90-day time period, ask the person or others to pin­
point an event that occurred 3 months ago, and then to relate the person's function­
ing to that event. For example, if the person visited a family member 3 months ago,
ask how able he or she was in making decisions during that trip.

Coding

0 Improved
1 No change
2 Declined
8 Uncertain

C6.

Self-Reported Activity Interests/Preferences and
Involvement

Intent

To document the person's engagement (or interest/preference in engaging) in cog­
nitively supportive activities.

Definitions

The activities listed have been shown to play a role in slowing cognitive decline on
the Cognitive Performance Scale.
C6a. Playing games with others-For example, Mahjong, bridge, chess, multiplayer video games.
C6b. Using computer, smartphone, tablet, or other similar activities
C6c. Doing puzzles-For example, crosswords, Sudoku, jigsaw.
C6d. Participating in program to improve memory-For example, formal pro­
grams (online or in person) to improve reasoning, speed-of-processing, or
memory.

Process

Section c Cognition

These are self-report items. If possible ask the person: "Are you interested in the
following activities, and if so, do you participate in the activity?" List each activity
and assess the response. Only the person's responses should be used to rate each
item. If the person is unable (due to cognitive impairment, for example) or refuses
to respond, do not dwell on these items and do not impute responses to the person.
Instead, use code "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''.

27

Coding

Consider both the person's preference (interest) in the activity and whether the
person is currently involved in the activity. Persons unable or unwilling to respond
should be scored "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''. Use the following
codes:
0 No preference, not involved in last 3 days
1 No preference, involved in last 3 days
2 Preferred, not involved
3 Preferred, regularly involved but not in last 3 days
4 Preferred, involved in last 3 days
8 Person could not (would not) respond

28

Section c Cognition

Section D

Communication and Vision
There are many possible causes for deteriorating communication. Some can be
attributed to the aging process; others are associated with progressive physical, neu­
rological, or psychiatric disorders. As persons age, a communication problem often
is caused by more than one factor. For example, an individual might have aphasia as
well as long-standing hearing loss; or he or she might have dementia and word-find­
ing difficulties and a hearing loss. The individual's physical, emotional, and social
situation may also complicate communication problems. Additionally, a noisy or an
isolating environment can inhibit opportunities for effective communication.
Deficits in one's ability to understand (receptive communication deficits) can
involve declines in hearing, comprehension (spoken or written), or recognition
of facial expressions. Deficits in one's ability to make him- or herself understood
(expressive communication deficits) can include reduced voice volume; difficulty
in producing sounds; or difficulty in finding the right word, constructing sentences,
writing, or gesturing.

01.

Making Self Understood (Expression)

Intent

To document the person's ability to express or communicate requests, needs, opin­
ions, and urgent problems and to engage in social conversation.

Definition

This item includes the person's ability to express or communicate requests, needs,
opinions, urgent problems, and social conversation, whether in speech, writing,
sign language, or a combination of these (includes the use of word board or key­
board). This item is not intended to address differences in language understanding,
such as a Russian speaker in an English-language facility, or difficulties with speech,
such as slurring words that may make expression unclear.

Process

Coding

Observe and listen to the person's efforts to communicate with you. If possible,
observe his or her interactions with family. If he or she has communication devices,
encourage their use during the assessment. If possible, observe the person's inter­
actions with others in different settings (for example, one-on-one, in groups, with
family members) and different circumstances (for example, when calm, when agi­
tated). If available, and needed, additional clarification can be secured by talking
with the individual's family or speech-language pathologist. Note that this item is
not intended to address differences in language understanding, such as only speak­
ing in a language not familiar to the assessor.
Enter the code that most closely corresponds to the person's ability to make himself
or herself understood over the last 3 days.
0 Understood- The person expresses ideas clearly without difficulty.

1 Usually understood- The person has difficulty finding the right words or fin­
ishing thoughts (resulting in delayed responses), BUT if given time, requires
little or no prompting.
(continued)

Section o Communication and Vision

29

(continued)

2 Often understood -The person has difficulty finding words or finishi ng
thoughts, AND prompting is usually required.
3 Sometimes understood -The person has limited ability, but is able to express
concrete requests regarding at least basic needs (such as food, drink, sleep, toilet,
pain).

4 Rarely or never understood -At best, understanding is limited to interpreta­
tion of highly individual, person-specific sounds or body language (for example,
caregiver has learned to interpret person signaling the presence of pain or need
to toilet).
02.

Ability to Understand Others (Comprehension)

Intent

To describe the person's ability to comprehend information, whether communi­
cated to the person by speaking, reading, or gesture, as well as sign language or
Braille.

Definition

This item involves the person's ability to understand others in whatever manner. It
includes the use of a hearing appliance, if needed. However, this item does not test
whether the problem is in understanding a particular language, such as when the
individual's native language is different than that normally used by others.

Process

Interact with the person. Consult with family. Ensure that issues ar e not based on
language differences between the person and others. It is expected that as you inter­
act with the person, you will be able to determine if he or she is able to understand
you. If there is some difficulty, pay attention to the amount of clarification or repeti­
tion the person requires to process and understand what is being said, and ask the
person if he or she sometimes has difficulty understanding or hearing what others
are saying. If the information is being provided by someone other than the person
(for example, a family member), ask the informant if the person in question has any
difficulty with understanding information.

Coding

Enter the number corresponding to the most accurate response.
0 Understands-Clearly comprehends the speaker's message(s) and demon­
strates comprehension by responding in words or actions/behaviors.
1 Usually understands- Person misses some part or intent of the message BUT
with little or no prompting comprehends most of it. The person may have peri­
odic difficulties integrating information but generally demonstrates comprehen­
sion by responding in words or actions/behaviors.
2 Often understands -The person misses some part or intent of the message.
BUT, with prompting (repetition or more detailed explanation), the person often
comprehends the conversation.
3 Sometimes understands -The person demonstrates frequent difficulties inte­
grating information and responds only to simple and direct questions or direc­
tions. When the message is rephrased or simplified, or gestures are used, the
person's comprehension is enhanced.

4 Rarely or never understands -At best, the person demonstrates very limited
ability to understand communication, or the assessor cannot determine whether
the person comprehends messages, based on his or her verbal and nonverbal
responses. Includes situations where the person can hear sounds but does not
understand messages.
30

Section o Communication and Vision

03.

Hearing

Intent

To evaluate the person's ability to hear with assistive devices, if used, and environ­
mental adjustments, if necessary, during the last 3-day period.

Process

Evaluate hearing ability after the person has a hearing device in place (if the per­
son uses a device). Be sure to ask if the battery works and the hearing device is on.
Interact with and observe the person and ask about hearing function. Consult the
person's family. If possible, observe the person interacting with others (such as fam­
ily members).
If possible, use a variety of observations to make your assessment (for example,
one-on-one vs. in group situations). Always be mindful of environmental factors
(nearby conversations, outside noises, etc.) that could influence your assessment.
If necessary, consult with the family, primary support people, or speech or hearing
specialists (if available) to clarify the person's exact hearing level.
Be alert to what you have to do to communicate with the person. Clues that there
is a hearing problem include having to speak more clearly or slowly or use a louder
tone or more gestures. Persons with hearing problems may also need to see your
face to know what you are saying, or you may have to take the person to a quieter
area.

Coding

Enter the number corresponding to the most correct response.
0 Adequate -No difficulty in normal conversation, social interaction, listening to
TV, or using the telephone.
1 Minimal difficulty-Difficulty in some environments (for example, when the
other person speaks softly or is more than 6 feet [2 meters] away).
2 Moderate difficulty-Problem hearing normal conversation, requires quiet
setting to hear well.
3 Severe difficulty-Difficulty in all situations (for example, speaker has to talk
loudly or speak very slowly, or person reports that all speech is mumbled).
4 No hearing

04.

Vision

Intent

To evaluate the person's ability to see close objects in adequate light, using the
person's customary visual devices for close vision (such as glasses or a magnifying
glass).

Definition

Adequate light -What is sufficient or comfortable for a person with normal
vision.

Process

Ask the person, and if necessary, family members or paid caregivers, if the person
has manifested any change in usual vision patterns over the last 3 days -for exam­
ple, is the person still able to read newsprint, email, and the like?
Ask the person about his or her visual abilities. Test the accuracy of your findings
by asking the person to look at regular-size print in a book or newspaper with what­
ever visual device he or she customarily uses for close vision (such as glasses or a
magnifying glass). Then ask the person to read aloud, starting with larger headlines
and ending with the finest, smallest print.
Be sensitive to the fact that some persons are not literate or are unable to read
your language (for example, English). In such cases, ask the person to read aloud

Section D Communication and Vision

31

individual letters or numbers (such as dates or page numbers), or to name items in
small pictures.
If the person i s unable to communicate or follow your directions, observe the
person's eye movements to see if his or her eyes seem to follow movement and
objects. For example, can the person see close objects in his or her environment,
such as food on the plate or the location of a cup? Though these are gross measure­
ments of visual acuity, they may assist you in assessing whether the person has any
visual ability.

Coding

Enter the number corresponding to the most correct response.
0 Adequate -The person sees fine detail, including regular print in newspapers/

books.

1 Minimal difficulty-The person sees large print but not regular print in news­

papers/books.

2 Moderate difficulty-The person has limited vision; is not able to see newspa­

per headlines, but can identify objects in his or her environment.

3 Severe difficulty-The person's ability to identify objects in his or her envi­

ronment is in question, but the person's eye movements appear to be following
objects (especially people walking by). Also includes the ability to see only light,
colors, or shapes.

NOTE: Many persons with severe cognitive impairment are unable to partici­
pate in vision screening because they are unable to follow directions or are
unable to tellyou what they see. However, many such persons appear to "track" or

follow moving objects in their environment with their eyes. For persons who appear
to do this, score the item "3" for "Severe difficulty''. This is often the best assessment
you can do with the limited technology available in the home environment.

4 No vision-The person has no vision; eyes do not appear to be following objects

(especially people walking by).

32

Section o Communication and Vision

Section E

Mood and Behavior
Mood distress is a serious condition and is associated with significant morbidity.
Associated factors include poor adjustment to one's living situation, functional
impairment, resistance to daily care, inability to participate in activities, social iso­
lation, increased risk of physical illness, cognitive impairment, and an increased
sensitivity to pain. It is particularly important to identify signs and symptoms of
mood distress because they are treatable.
Most family members have not received specific training in how to evaluate per­
sons who have distressed mood or behavioral symptoms. Therefore, although fam­
ily may sense that something is wrong, mood distress is often underdiagnosed and
undertreated in community settings. Thus, the assessment may serve as a crucial
first opportunity to identify whether such problems are present.

E1 .
Intent

Definitions

Indicators of Possible Depressed, Anxious, or Sad Mood
To record the presence of mood indicators observed in the last 3 days, irrespective
of the assumed cause. In some cases, an indicator may not have been observed in
the last 3 days, but it continues to be "present" and active in a way that has a mean­
ingful impact on the person's current care needs. When combined with other items
in the assessment, these indicators can provide information about the severity of
the person's condition.
Indicators may be expressed verbally through direct statements or through behav­
iors that can be monitored by observing the person during usual daily routines.
Ela. Made negative statements-For example, "Nothing matters"; "Would
rather be dead than live this way"; "What's the use"; "Regret having lived so
long"; "Let me die:'
Elb. Repetitive anxious complaints/concerns (non-health-related)-For exam­
ple, persistently seeks attention/reassurance regarding schedules, meals,
laundry, clothing, and relationships.
Elc. Sad, pained, or worried facial expressions -For example, furrowed brow,
constant frowning.
Eld. Withdrawal from activities of interest-Including long-standing activi­
ties, being with family/friends.
Ele. Reduced social interactions
Elf.

Process

Expressions, including nonverbal, of a lack of pleasure in life (anhedo nia) -For example, saying "I don't enjoy anything anymore:'

Engage in conversation with the person and observe the person interacting with
others. Keep in mind on a follow-up assessment any previous statements made by
the person and observations that you have made.
Some persons may freely share their feelings, and in this instance feelings of psy­
chic distress may be expressed directly by the person who is depressed, anxious, or

Section E Mood and Behavior

33

sad. Some persons are more verbal about their feelings than others and will either
tell someone about their distress or will at least tell someone when asked directly
how they feel. For persons who verbalize their feelings, ask how long these have
been present. Other persons may be unable to articulate their feelings perhaps
because they cannot find the words to describe how they feel or lack insight or cog­
nitive capacity. Distress can also be expressed through nonverbal indicators.
Remember to be aware of cultural differences in how these indicators may be
manifested. Some persons may be more or less expressive of emotions or feelings
because of their cultural norms. Be cautious not to minimize your interpretation
of an indicator based on your expectations about the person's cultural background.
On the other hand, it is important to be especially sensitive to these indicators when
assessing a person whose culture may make him or her more stoic in expressions.
Observe the person carefull y for any indicator, both at the time of the planned
assessment and in any direct contacts you may have with the person during the 3
days covered by this assessment. Consult with family members who have direct
knowledge of the person's typical and current behavior, and any other clinicians
working with the person (such as the primary care provider, if available).
In situations where there is a discrepancy between what is reported by the per­
son, what you obser ve, and what is reported by others, use your clinical judgment
to determine the best response.
Coding

Score each indicator based on the person's behavior over the last 3 days, regardless
of what you believe to be the underlying cause of the indicator. Remember to code
for both the presence of the indicator and the number of days in which it was exhib­
ited. Use the following codes:
0 Not present
1 Present but not exhibite d in last 3 days -Use this code if you know the indica­
tor is present and active, even though it was not observed over the last 3 days.
2 Exhibited on 1-2 of last 3 days
3 Exhibited daily in last 3 days

E2.

Self-Reported Mood

Intent

To record the person's self-reported mood over the last 3 days. In some cases, the
person may deny feeling a particular way in the last 3 days, but reports that the issue
continues to be "present" and active.

Definitions

These items involve verbal reports of the person's subjective evaluation of four
dimensions of mood state (anhedonia, anxiety, dysphoria, anger) over the last 3
days.
Ask: "In the last 3 days, how often have you felt . . ?'
E2a. Little interest or pleasure in things you normally enjoy?
E2b. Anxious, restless, or uneasy?
E2c. Sad, depresse d, or hopeless?
E2d. Angry with yourself?
E2e. Angry with others?

34

Section E Mood and Behavi or

Process

Ask the person the previous questions directly once you have completed your own
ratings of the person's mood state using the other items in the Mood section of the
assessment. Only the person's responses should be used to rate each item. If the
person is unable (due to cognitive impairment, for example) or refuses to respond,
do not dwell on these items and do not impute responses to the person. Instead, use
code "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''.

Coding

Code each item using the person's response. Remember to code for both the pres­
ence of the indicator and the number of days in which it was felt, no matter how
often it was felt per day. Persons unable or unwilling to respond should be scored
"8'' for "Person could not (would not) respond'. Use the following codes:
0 Not in last 3 days
1 Not in last 3 days, but often feels that way - Use this code only if the person
indicates the feeling is frequently present and active, but was not experienced in

the last 3 days.
2 In 1-2 oflast 3 days
3 Daily in last 3 days
8 Person could not (would not) respond

E3.

Self-Reported Life Satisfaction

Intent

To record the person's current perception of his/her overall satisfaction with life.

Process

Ask the person the question using the exact words on the form -"At the current
time, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole?" If the person asks for clarifica­
tion, repeat the words as written. Only the person's responses should be used to
rate each item. If the person is unable (due to cognitive impairment, for example)
or refuses to respond, do not dwell on the item and do not impute a response; use
code "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''.

Coding

Use the following codes:
0 Delighted
1 Pleased/content
2 Mostly satisfied, but it could be better
3 Less satisfied
4 Dissatisfied
8 Person could not (would not) respond

E4.

Behavior Symptoms

Intent

To identify the frequency of behavioral symptoms during the last 3 days that cause
distress to the person, or are distressing or disruptive to others with whom the
person lives. Such behaviors include those that are potentially harmful to the per­
son or disruptive to others. Behavioral symptoms may reflect how a person expe­
riences unmet needs, feelings of insecurity, fear or anxiety, or somatic symptoms
such as pain or shortness of breath. Acknowledging and documenting behavioral

Section E Mood and Behavior

35

symptoms provides a basis for further evaluation, planning, and delivery of consis­
tent, appropriate care that can help to reduce the severity and frequency of behav­
ioral symptoms.
Definitions

E4a. Wandering-Moves about with no discernible, rational purpose. A wan­
dering person may be oblivious to his or her physical or safety needs. Wan­
dering behavior should be differentiated from purposeful movement (such
as a hungry person moving about the apartment in search of food). Wander­
ing may be by walking or by wheelchair. Do not include pacing back and
forth, which is not considered wandering.
E4b. Verbal abuse-For example, threatens, screams at, or curses at others.
E4c. Physical abuse -For example, hits, shoves, scratches, or sexually abuses
others.
E4d. Socially inappropriate or disruptive behavior -For example, makes
disruptive sounds or noises, screams out, smears or throws food or feces,
hoards, or rummages through others' belongings.
E4e. Inappropriate public sexual behavior or public disrobing -Sexual
behavior should only be considered inappropriate when it violates usual
social norms (for example, deliberately exposing oneself; masturbating in
public or in a room while others are present; or unacceptable sexual gestures
like touching or pinching). Sexual activity done in private (either alone or
between consenting adults) is not included here. Public disrobing deals with
behavior that contravenes local laws. In the case of disrobing, code for the
absence or presence and frequency of the behavior but not the intent.
E4f. Resists care -This item is intended to provide information about the per­
son's responses to interventions and to prompt further investigation of causes
for care planning purposes. For example, the person struggles against tak­
ing medications or pushes caregiver while receiving assistance with ADLs.
This category does not include instances in which the person has made an
informed choice not to follow a course of care (for example, the person has
exercised his or her right to refuse treatment and reacts negatively as others
try to reinstitute treatment). Signs of resistance may be verbal or physical
(such as verbally refusing care or pushing the caregiver away in relation to
care offered). These behaviors are not necessarily positive or negative; such
causes might include fear of pain, fear of falling, poor comprehension, anger,
poor relationships, eagerness for greater participation in care decisions, past
experience with medication errors and unacceptable care, or desire to mod­
ify the care being provided.
E4g. Outbursts of anger-Intense flare-up(s) of anger in reaction to specific
actions or events, could rise to the point of rage.

Process

36

Ask a family member or caregiver if each specified problem behavior occurred.
Take an objective view of the person's behavioral symptoms, and focus on the per­
son's actions, not intent. The fact that others have become used to the behavior or
minimize the person's presumed intent ("He doesn't really mean to hurt anyone­
he's just frightened") should not be considered in coding items.
Observe the person and the way he or she responds to attempts by family or
others to deliver care. Ask caregivers if they know what occurred throughout the
day and night for the last 3 days. If possible, try to do this when the person is not
present. Recognize that responses given with the person present may need to be
validated later.Also, the presence of multiple caregivers during the assessment may
discourage individuals from answering forthrightly.

Section E Mood and Behavior

Coding

Code for the presence of each behavior symptom over the last 3 days. Remember to
code for both the presence of the behavior and the number of days i n which it was
exhibited. Use the following codes:
0 Not present
1 Present but not exhibited in last 3 days -Note that this code indicates that
while the assessor knows the condition is present and active, it was not physi­

cally manifested over the last 3 days.

2 Exhibited on 1-2 oflast 3 days
3 Exhibited daily in last 3 d ays

Examples of How to Code Behavior Symptoms
Mr. W has dementia and is severely impaired in making daily decisions. He wanders all
around the aparLment throughout lhe day. He is extremely hard of hearing without his
hearing aid, which he wears daily. H e is easily frightened by others and cannot stay still
when anyone visits. Numerous attempts more than a week ago to redirect his wandering
resulted in a physical response; he hit and pushed family, but said nothing. Over time,
family members have found him to be most content while he is wandering within the
structured setting of the apartment.
Code: E4a (Wandering) = "3" = "Exhibited daily in last 3 days".
Code: E4b (Verbal abuse) = "O" = "Not present".
Code: E4c (Physical abuse) === "l" === "Present but not exhibited in last 3 days".
Code: E4d (Socially inappropriate or disruptive behavior) = "0" = "Not present".

Code: E4e (Inappropriate public sexual behavior or disrobing) = "0" = "Not
present".

Code: E4f (Resists care) = "0" = "Not present".
Code: E4g (Outbursts of anger) = "0" = "Not present'' .

Mrs. N's daughter states she has found her mother going through the daughter's closet
in the middle of the night. This has happened on 2 of the last 3 nights. When she tried to
get her mother to return to her own room, the mother became angry and shouted at her
daughler. She accused the daughter of stealing her things.

= "Not present".
Code: E4b (Verbal abuse) = "2" = "Exhibited on 1 - 2 oflast 3 days".
Code: E4a (Wandering) = ''O"

Code: E4c (Physical abuse) = ''0" = "Not present".
Code: E4d (Socially inappropriate or disruptive behavior)
1-2 of last 3 days".

= "2" = "Exhibited on

Code: E4e (Inappropriate public sexual behavior or disrobing) = "0" = "Not
present''.
Code: E4f (Resists care) = "0" = "Not present".
Code: E4g (Outbursts of anger)= "2" = "Exhibited on 1-2 of last 3 days".

Section E Mood and Behavior

37

Section F

Psychosocial Well-Being
F1.

Social Relationships

Intent

To document and describe the person's interaction patterns and adaptation to his
or her social environment. To assess the degree to which the person is involved in
social activities, meaningful roles, and daily pursuits. The focus here is on well­
established, informal ties rather than visits with paid staff, volunteers, or new
acquaintances.

Definitions

Fla. Participation in social activities of long-standing interest-The person
engaged in social activities that have been of long-standing interest to him or
her. The activities may be quite varied and should be counted as long as they
involve interaction with at least one other person. Examples include attend­
ing meetings of informal clubs or religious services, playing bingo or card
games, volunteering at the local food bank, or gossiping with the neighbors
in the evening.
Flb. Visit with a long-standing social relation or family member-The person
was visited by (or made a visit to) a family member, friend, or social acquain­
tance who has a long-standing relationship with the person (for example, a
neighbor or fellow member of a community organization or religious group).
Flc. Other interaction with long-standing social relation or fam ily mem­
ber -For example, telephone, email, video conferencing, chat room. The
person interacted through a means other than a face-to-face visit with a fam­
ily member, friend, or social acquaintance with a long-standing relationship
with the person.
Fld. Helping others, volunteering-A wide variety of activities fall within the
scope of these activities. Examples include volunteering at a help desk or at
an organization, helping a neighbor get groceries or medicines, or assisting
a child by baby-sitting or driving family members to visits or activities.
Fle. Conflict or anger with family or friends -The person expresses feelings
such as abandonment, ingratitude on part of the family, lack of understand­
ing by close friends, or hostility regarding relationships.
Flf.

Fearful of a family member or close acquaintance-The person expresses
(verbally or through behavior) fear of a family member or close acquain­
tance. Such fear can be expressed in many ways. A person may state that
he or she is afraid of a caregiver or may appear to withdraw whenever the
caregiver is around. This may include fear of physical or emotional abuse or
mistreatment. It is not necessary to establish the reason for the fear, only to
determine whether it is present.

Flg. Neglected, abused, or mistreated-The person experienced a serious
or life-threatening situation or condition that went untreated or was not
appropriately acknowledged. The situation may have put the person at risk
of death, or of complications that impinge on physical or mental health.

Section F Psychosocial Well-Being

39

Process

Discuss with the person what activities he or she enjoys and how recently the per­
son participated. Find out who comes to visit and when the last visits occurred.
Identify ways the person contacts family or friends, for example, by telephone or
email. Ask if the person is generally content or unhappy in relationships with family
and friends. If the person is unhappy, find out what specifically he or she is unhappy
about.
If possible, also talk with family members and friends who visit or have frequent
contact with the person. The primary caregiver may have a good sense of who visits
or contacts the person. He or she can also describe the most common social activi­
ties the person was involved in recently.
NOTE: Score "8" for "Unable to determine" if no information is available from
the person or other informants about the person's social relationships.

Coding

0 Never
1 More than 30 days ago

2 8 to 30 days ago

3 4 to 7 days ago
4 In last 3 days
8 Unable to determine

Example of How to Code Conflict or Anger
with Family or Friends
Mr. H tells the assessor he has to do what his daughter says or "she gets mad atme:• He said
that he sees her every weekend and she "bosses » him around. When the assessor taJks to
his daughter, she reports no conflict. The assessment takes place on a Thursday.
Code: F l e = "3" = "4 to 7 days ago".

F2.
Intent

Definition

Process

40

Change in Social Activities in Last 90 Days (or Since Last
Assessment If Less Than 90 Days Ago)
To identify a recent change in the person's level of participation in social, religious,
occupational, or other preferred activities. If the level of participation has declined,
determine whether the person is distressed by it.
The level of participation refers to the different types of social activities, how fre­
quently contact occurs, and how deeply the person is involved. Distress occurs
when the person's mood is adversely affected by a recent change in the level of
participation (as evidenced by sadness, loss of motivation or self-esteem, anxiety,
or depression, for example).
Talk with the person to determine whether a change has occurred and to determine
his or her subjective response to any changes. If possible, speak with the family or
other informal contacts (such as neighbors) to get their opinions on whether the
person's activity levels have changed and, if so, how he or she responded to those
changes.

Section F Psychosocial Well-Being

Coding

0 No decline -There was no change or there was an increase in the person's level

of participation in social activities.
1 Decline, not distressed- The person experienced a decline in his or her level
of participation in social activities without a corresponding increase in his or her
distress.
2 Decline, distressed -Both decline and distress are observed or reported.

F3.

Has a Close Friend in the Community

Intent

To document whether the person has at least one close friend in the community.

Definition

Close friend - Someone with whom the person interacts on a regular basis (either

in person or by electronic means) and is "there" for the person, makes him or her
feel at ease; someone who can be counted on and reciprocates the friendship. The
close friend may be a relative or a non-relative.
Coding

0 No
1 Yes

F4.

Degree of Loneliness

Intent

To identify if the person is lonely and, if so, how lonely.

Process

Ask the person to indicate what response best describes when he or she feels lonely.
If possible, base on the person's self-report of the degree of loneliness, consider­
ing the frequency and situations in which it is experienced. If the person cannot
respond, the scoring of the item is based on reviewing the person's records, obser­
vation, and discussion with family, friends, or caregivers.

Coding

0 Not lonely

1 Only in certain situations or triggered by specific events (for example, anniversary of spouse's death)

2 Occasionally (less than weekly)
3 Frequently (weekly but less than daily)
4 Daily

FS.

Major Life Stressors in Last 90 Days

Intent

To identify any life events in the last 90 days that have had a major impact on the
person's life.

Definition

Life stressors -Experiences that either disrupted or threatened to disrupt a per­

son's daily routine and that imposed some degree of readjustment.
Process

Ask the person if any stressful events have occurred in the last 9 0 days. Examples
include an episode of personal illness, the death or illness of a close family member
or friend, the loss of the person's home, a loss of income or assets, being the victim

Section F Psychosocial Well-Being

41

of a crime such as robbery or assault, the loss of the person's driving license or car,
or the loss of social interaction due to societal rules in reaction to an infectious
disease (for example, influenza) or other general social distancing requirement.
Note: If the person cannot respond, base your coding on your observation, a record
review (if available), and discussions with caregivers.

Coding

0 No

1 Yes

42

Section F Psychosocial Well-Being

Section G

Functional Status
Many persons who receive supportive care in the community have multiple chronic
illnesses and are subject to a variety of other challenges that can impact self­
sufficiency. For example, cognitive deficits can limit a person's ability or willingness
to initiate or participate in self-care or can constrict his or her understanding of the
tasks required to complete activities of daily living (ADLs). A wide range of illnesses
can adversely affect physical factors important to self-care, such as stamina, muscle
tone, balance, and bone strength. Side effects of medications and other treatments
can also contribute to needless loss of self-sufficiency.
Due to these many, possibly adverse, influences, a person's potential for maxi­
mum functionality is often underestimated by family, staff, and the person him- or
herself.

61.

Mobility

Intent

To examine aspects of mobility, including use of assistive devices, distance walked,
and days out of residence.

G1a.

Bedbound [Missouri Item]

Intent

To identify persons who are confined to their bed.

Definition

Very severely impaired mobility that presents as the inability to get out of bed to
carry out activities of daily living, due to a medical diagnosis or condition.

Coding

0 No
I Yes

G1b.

Use of mobility devices (indoors)

Intent

To record the use of aids or assistive devices over the last 3 days indoors.

Definitions

G Iba. Cane -A slender stick held in the hand and used for support when walking.
Gibb. Walker/crutch-A crutch is a device for aiding a person with walking. Usually it is a long staff with a padded crescent-shaped portion at the top that is
placed under the armpit. A walker usually consists of a stable platform made
of metal tubing that the person grasps while taking a step. The person then
moves the walker forward and takes another step.
Gibe. Manual wheelchair-A chair on wheels that the person propels using two
hands or two feet or a combination of hands and feet.
Glbd. Electric or motorized wheelchair/scooter-A chair on wheels operated
by a joystick or other controls depending on person's needs/abilities.

Section G Functional Status

43

Coding

Code based on total time person spends moving about indoors. First identify the
total time, and then apportion to each type of mobility device used. For example, i f
the total time came to one hour, and 45 minutes was with a walker, 5 minutes was
by cane, and 10 minutes was without any assistive device, score as follows : cane =
"I " , walker = "2", manual wheelchair = "0", electric wheelchair = "0".
For those people who are active and up and about most of the day, ask the person
if he or she reaches for a mobility aid. If not every time, then ask what proportion of
the time the device is used to walk when indoors.
0 Did not use
1 Used less than three-quarters of time
2 Used three-quarters or more of time

G1c.

Distance walked-farthest distance walked at one time without
sitting down in the LAST 3 DAYS (with support as needede.g., holds walls, uses cane, uses walker)

Intent

To assess the person's independence in walking around the home or the community
with help as needed.

Definition

Farthest distance walked at one time in the last 3 days without sitting down, with
support as needed.

Process

Ask the person and family member about the person's walking in the home or com­
munity during the last 3 days. Record the farthest distance walked without sitting
down.

Coding

0 Did not walk
1 Less than 15 feet (under 5 meters)
2 15-149 feet (5-49 meters)
3 150-299 feet (50-99 meters)
4 300+ feet (100+ meters)
5 ½ mile or more (1+ kilometers)

G1d.

In the LAST 3 DAYS, number of days went out of residence (no
matter how short the period)

Definition

Went out of the residence -This means the person went outdoors, no matter how
short the period of time he or she spent outdoors. This could mean going into the
yard, standing on an open porch, going out to the garden, or walking down the
street.

Process

Ask the person or family if the person went outside in the last 3 days.

44

Section G Functional Status

Coding

If illness or weather did not permit (for example, if it snowed or there was a heavy
rain) and the person did not leave the house but normally would have during a
3-day period, use code "l".
0 No days out
1 Did not go out in last 3 days, but usually goes out over a 3 -day period
2 1-2 days
3 3 days

G2.

Activity Level

Intent

Moderate physical activity in connection with activities of everyday life or chosen
activities can help to keep persons in home care fit in many ways. Below a cer­
tain threshold of activity, functional and cognitive decline may be accelerated. In
assessing performance in this area, you may also gather information on whether
the person is motivated to undertake physical activity, what barriers need to be
overcome, and whether health education is needed. Many persons are interested
in maintaining health. They usually know that lifestyle practices may be important,
but they often need concrete information about how important their own lifestyle
is for health maintenance. For example, the person may understand the general
importance of exercise and good nutrition but may not be willing or readily able to
make changes without some type of support or assistance.

G2a.

Total hours of exercise in LAST 3 DAYS

Definition

Exercise -Any structured and planned movement (exercise) intended to improve
or maintain physical performance and fitness -for example, participation in for­
mal exercise classes, yoga, Tai Chi.

Process

Ask the person and family to describe the person's involvement in structured and
planned exercise activity in the last 3 days.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 None
1 None, but usually exercises
2 1 to 30 minutes
3 More than 30 minutes but less than 1 hour
4 1 hour or more but less than 2 hours
5 2 hours or more but less than 3 hours
6 3 hours or more

Section G Functional Status

45

G2b.

Total hours of physical activity in LAST 3 DAYS

Definition

Physical activity-Usual daily activity such as walking/wheeling about the resi­
dence (for example, to room in house, to do housework); walking/wheeling out­
doors (for example, walk around the building or block, to work in the garden, to
walk with family or friends in the neighborhood, to go out for a long walk or run).
Note: Walking can be considered exercise if the person is purposefully following a
regimen of long-distance walking to improve fitness or endurance.
Note: Do not count the same activity as exercise and physical activ ity.

Process

Ask the person and family to describe the person's usual daily activities.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 None
1 None, but usually physically active
2 1 to 30 minutes
3

More than 30 minutes but less than 1 hour

4 1 hour or more but less than 2 hours
5 2 hours or more but less than 3 hours
6 3 hours or more

63.

Self-Reported Fitness Program

Intent

To identify if the person is either presently engaged in a fitness program, or if not
engaged, has an interest in joining such a program.

Process

Ask the person whether he or she participates in or is interested in a program
to improve their fitness level. This item is self-report only. Only the person's
responses should be used to rate the item. Do not code the item based on your
own inferences about the person's interest or participation in a fitness improve­
ment program. Record the response that best describes their state. Persons unable
or unwilling to respond should be scored "8" for "Person could not (would not)
respond''. Use the following codes:

Coding

0 Interested, participated
1 Interested, not participated
2

Not interested

8

Person could not (would not) respond

64.

Capacity to Complete Instrumental Activity of Daily Living
(IADL) Tasks

Intent

To examine whether the person has the ability to carry out certain everyday tasks
commonly referred to as instrumental activities of daily living, or IADLs. As per­
sons decline in physical and/or mental function, they tend to require assistance in
these areas prior to needing assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs).

46

Section G Functional Status

Definitions

G4a. Meal preparation -How meals are prepared (planning meals, assembling
ingredients, cooking, setting out food and utensils). Focus on the person's
ability to put meals together, regardless of the quality or nutritional value of
the meal. For example, if the person is able to make cold cereal for breakfast,
or put together a cold sandwich and drink at lunch, or make toast for din­
ner without assistance, the person would be scored as independent in meal
preparation capacity.
G4b. Ordinary housework-How ordinary work around the house is performed
(for example, doing dishes, dusting, making bed, tidying up, laundry).
G4c. Manage .finances -How finances are managed (for example, paying bills,
balancing checkbook, and monitoring credit card accounts).
G4d. Manage medications -How medications are managed (for example,
remembering to take medications, opening bottles, taking correct drug dos­
ages, giving injections, applying ointments).
G4e. Manage use of electronic devices-How devices are managed (for exam­
ple, computer, tablet, smartphone).
G4f. Stairs -How a fu ll flight of stairs is managed (that is, 12-14 stairs). If the
person is able to go up and down only a half flight (2-6 stairs), do not score
as independent.
G4g. Shopping-How performs in-store shopping for food and household items
(e.g., selecting items, paying money)-EXCLUDE TRANSPORTATION
OR USE OF GROCERY DELIVERY SERVICES
G4h. Manage online shopping/ordering-How manages online ordering of
essential items such as food, clothes, household goods, etc. (for example,
creating list of needed goods, ensuring necessary stock of essential goods
is maintained, going online and identifying site, placing electronic order,
entering address, paying for goods).
G4i. Transportation -How person travels by paid transportation (navigating a
bus system, paying fare) or drives self (including getting out of the house,
into and out of vehicles).

Process

Talk with the person about his or her performance of normal activities around the
home and community in the last 3 days. You may also talk with family members or
paid caregivers if they are available.

Coding

Score each item based on the person's presumed ability to carry out the activity.
This requires speculation by the assessor. Do NOT score based on the person's
actual performance. Because of lack of skills or experience, a person may not actu­
ally perform some activities, but would be capable of doing so with the proper train­
ing or opportunity. For example, some males may never have learned to cook, and
some females may never have handled financial matters, but can be taught to carry
out such tasks. First, determine whether the person actually performed the activity
safely and with no supervision, in which case the capacity score would equal "O" for
"Independent''. If not, evaluate to what extent the person is capable of carrying out
the task.
0 Independent-No help, setup, or supervision needed.
I Setup help only-Articles or device provided or placed within reach, no physi­
cal assistance or supervision in any episode.
2 Supervision -Oversight/cuing required.
(continued)

Section G Functional Status

47

(continued)

3 Limited assistance- Help required on some occasions.
4 Extensive assistance-Help required throughout task, but could perform 50%
or more of task on own.
5 Maximal assistance-Help required throughout task, but could perform less
than 50% of task on own.
6 Total dependence - Full performance of activity during entire period by others.

Examples of How to Code IADLs
Mr. J does not prepare any of his own meals. His wife does all the cooking. When asked
whether he could do his own meal preparation if he had to, he replies "Yes, but not as well
as mywife, as she's a real pro. But I could manage:' His wife agrees that Mr. J could do some
cooking, although it would likely be something heated up in the microwave, as Mr. J has
limited cooking skills.
Code: G4a = "O" c: "Independent".
Rationale: Both Mr. 1 and his wife agree that he could do his own meal preparation if
necessary.
Mrs. R has severe arthritis and has difficulty with stairs. A paid helper comes over every
oU,er day lo do the laundry, vacuum, and change the bed linen. Mrs. R still enjoys doing
the dusting, the dishes, and keepingthings "all neat and tidy;' but says the pain in her hands
and legs makes it hard Lo do much more. The apartment looks well-cared for and clean.
Code: G4b = "5" = "Maximal assistance".
Rationale: Mrs. R is still involved in some housework, but the paid helper is doing more
than 50% of the subtasks.
Mr. F is recovering from a motorcycle accident that severely injured one leg. While making
progress in walking independently with the use of a cane, Mr. F is afraid of falling when
he goes upstairs to his bedroom every night and asks his aide to stand behind him "just in
case'.' Mr. F then climbs the stairs slowly without further help. If his aide doesn't come, Mr.
r sleeps on d,e sofa in his living room. His aide agrees that Mr. F might fall if he tried to
climb the stairs w,assisted. He reports that Mr. F is able to "bump" down the stairs on his
backside in the mOl'ning without assislance.

=

=

Code: G4f "2" "Supervision".
Rationale: Although Mr. F can manage going down the stairs unaided, Mr. F needs
oversight from his aide to climb the stairs.
Ms. Q's daughter visits every Sunday and does the shopping for the week. While appre­
ciating her daughter's help, Ms. Q feels she would have no difficulty doing the shopping
herself. When asked about this, the daughter reports that her mother could not push a
grocery cart, due to a bad rotator cuff, but could selecl items and use her credit card to
pay for them.
Code: G4g = "3" = "Limited assistance".
Rationale: Ms. Q's daughter is doing the actual shopping, but agrees her mother could
do some of the shopping subtasks.

48

Section G Functional Status

GS.
Intent
Definitions

Activities of Daily Living (AOL) Self-Performance and
Capacity [Missouri Specific]
To record the person's performance and capacity to carry out common self-care
tasks, often called activities of daily living (ADLs), during the last 3 days.
ADL self-performance -what the person actually did for themselves, based on all
episodes of the activity over the last 3 days. Do not base self-performance coding on
what the person might be capable of doing.
ADL capacity-the person's presumed ability to carry out the activity. This requires
speculation by the assessor.
Note -Code each item for both Performance and Capacity
G5a. Bathing-How the person takes a full-body bath or shower. Includes how
each part of the body is bathed: arms, upper and lower legs, chest, abdomen,
perineal area.Exclude washing of back and hair, as well as transfer in/out
of bath or shower.
G5b. Bath transfer-How the person transfers in/out of bath or shower.
G5c. Personal hygiene-How the person manages personal hygiene, including
combing hair, brushing teeth, shaving, applying makeup, washing and dry­
ing face and hands. Exclude baths and showers.
G5d. Dressing upper body-How the person dresses and undresses (street
clothes, underwear) above the waist, including prostheses, orthotics, fasten­
ers, pullovers, and so on.
G5e. Dressing lower body-How the person dresses and undresses (street
clothes, underwear) from the waist down, including prostheses, orthotics,
belts, pants, skirts, shoes, fasteners, and so on.
G5f. Walking-How the person walks between locations on the same floor
indoors. Excludes one or two steps taken when transferring, for example,
from bed to chair.
G5g. Locomotion -How the person moves between locations on the same floor
(walking or wheeling). If the person uses a wheelchair, measure self-suffi­
ciency once he or she is in the chair.
G5h. Transfer toilet-How the person moves on and off the toilet or commode.
G5i. Toilet use-How the person uses the toilet room (or commode, bedpan,
urinal), cleanses him- or herself after toilet use or incontinent episode(s),
changes bed pad, manages ostomy or catheter, adjusts clothes. Exclude
transfer on and off the toilet.
G5j. Bed mobility-How the person moves to and from a lying position, turns
from side to side, and positions his or her body while in bed. Note: "Bed
mobility" includes those tasks completed once a person is lying on the bed
or other sleeping surface. It does not include lifting the legs in and/or out of
the bed.
G5k. Eating-How the person eats and drinks, regardless of skill.. Includes intake
of nourishment by other means, such as tube feeding or total parenteral
nutrition.
Frequency of task performance-Measurement includes the extent to which per­
son performs activity on own as well as the amount of assistance received from
others during the 3-day period.

Section G Functional Status

49

Setup help -Assistance characterized by the provision of articles, devices, or
preparation necessary for the person's self-performance of an activity. This includes
giving or holding out an item the person takes from the helper, if the helper then
leaves the person alone to complete the activity. Following are a few examples of
setup help. For the "Personal hygiene" item, setup help might mean providing a
washbasin or grooming articles. For "Walking;' it might take the form of handing
the person a walker or cane. For "Toilet use:' it might be handing the person a bed­
pan or placing within reach the articles necessary for changing an ostomy appliance.
For "Eating;' setup help might include cutting meat or opening food containers.
Supervision -Assistance characterized by a helper remaining nearby to watch
over or verbally prompt the person during ADL activities. If the person is receiving
ongoing oversight of the activity, the score would be "2" for "Supervision''. Note: The
focus is on observing the action and being prepared to step in when needed; simple
social visiting as an activity occurs (for example, transfer from a chair) should not
be scored as supervision.
Weight-bearing assistance-Persons may require varying degrees of physical
assistance to complete ADL tasks. A key concept in scoring the degree of assistance
is the degree of weight-bearing support provided. For non-upright positions, such
support might take the form of a helper holding the full weight of an arm while
assisting the person with putting on a shirt. For standing or walking, such support
might mean taking the person's weight by holding him or her under the armpit, or
allowing the person to lean on the helper's arm. Guiding movements with minimal
physical contact and contact guarding with intermittent physical assistance are not
considered weight bearing.
Activity did not occur vs. total dependence -Do not confuse total dependence
in an ADL activity (code "6") with nonoccurrence of the activity itself (code "8").
For example, even a person who receives tube feedings and no food or fluids by
mouth is engaged in eating (receiving nourishment) and should be evaluated under
the eating category for the level of assistance provided in the process. A person who
is highly involved in giving him- or herself a tube feeding is not totally dependent
and should not be coded as "6" but as a lower code, depending on the amount of
the assistance from others.
Process

To describe functioning, the assessor should first get a sense of the number of
times, or "episodes:• of each ADL activity. When ADL self-performance in a task
varies over the last 3 days, identify the three most dependent episodes -that is,
the episodes when the person received the greatest care or assistance from others.
Use the three most dependent episodes to develop the ADL scores described in the
scoring rules below.
Engage family (or, when possible, formal home care staff who have cared fo r the
person over the last 3 days) in discussions regarding the person's ADL functions.
Remind them that the focus is on the last 3 days only. To clarify your own under­
standing and observations about each ADL activity, ask probing questions, begin­
ning with the general and proceeding to the more specific.
To score the actual performance of the person, record what the person actually
does. In addition, do not record the level of assistance you believe the person "should"
be receiving (for example, based on a written plan of care or expectations the family
may have). The type and level of assistance actually provided might be quite different
from what is indicated in a care plan. Record what is actually happening.
In order to summarize ADL self-performance, gather information as follows:
Observe how the person is performing each task.
Talk with the person to ascertain what he or she does for him- or herself in
each ADL, as well as the type and level of assistance provided by others.

so

Section G Functional Status

If possible, talk with immediate caregivers or family members.
Get information pertaining to all aspects of the ADL definitions. For example,
when discussing "Personal hygiene" (Item G5c), inquire how the person manages
washing in the morning, combing hair, brushing teeth, and shaving. A person can
be independent in one aspect of personal hygiene yet require extensive assistance in
another aspect. To score the person's capacity, determine whether the person actu­
ally performed the activity. If not, evaluate whether the person is capable of per­
forming the task, and record what you believe the person could do for themselves.
Because of choice or a lack of opportunity, a person may not perform some activi­
ties, but would be capable of doing so with proper opportunity. Therefore, you may
distinguish between nonperformance that is due to impairment of capability (due
to health problems) and nonperformance that is due to other factors (not related
to a person's health). For example, a person who is able to wash their body but can­
not enter the bathtub al one safely because it has high sides and no grab bar, would
be dependent in Bath Transfer capacity but independent in their Bathing capacity.
Finally, weigh all responses to come up with a consistent picture of the person's
ADL performance and capacity for each task.
Coding for AOL Self-Performance

The following are the ADL self-perfor mance scoring rules.

■ If all episodes in the last 3 days were performed at the same support level,
score the ADL at that level. Also note that this rule applies when there was
only one performance episode during the 3-day period. For example, if over
the course of the 3 days the person moved once between locations on the
same floor but was bed-bound for the remainder of the time, then the score
for Item G5g ("Locomotion") should be based on the single episode when the
person moved.

■ Note that to receive a score of "0" ("Independent"), "6" ("Total dependence"),
or "8" (''.Activity did not occur"), all performance episodes must be at the
same level.

■ If any episodes would be coded as "6" ("Total dependence") and other epi­
sodes would be coded as less dependent, code the item as "5" ("Maximal
assistance").

■ Otherwise, focus on the three most dependent episodes (or the two most
dependent episodes if theADL was only performed twice). If the most depend­
ent of these episodes would be scored "l" for "Independent, setup help only';
score the item "l". If the most dependent of these episodes would receive a
higher score, however, code the item to match the least dependent of those
episodes in the range between-"2", "3", "4", and "5".
In accordance with these rules and the guidelines below, enter the number corre­
sponding to the most correct response.
0 Independent-No physical assistance, setup, or supervision in any episode.
1 Independent, setup help only-Article or device provided or placed within
reach, no physical assistance or supervision in any episode.
2 Supervision -Oversight/cuing.
3 Limited assistance-Guided maneuvering of limbs, physical guidance without
taking weight.
(continued)

Section G Functional Status

51

(continued)

4 Extensive assistance - Weight-bearing support (including lifting limbs) by one
helper where person still performs 5 0% or more of subtasks.
5 Maximal assistance -Weight-bearing support (including lifting limbs) by two
or more helpers or weight-bearing support for more than 50% of subtasks.
6 Total dependence -Full performance by others during all episodes.
8 Activity did not occur during entire period
Coding for AOL Capacity

Using the same codes as above, except for ''.Activity did not occur during entire
period;' score for the level that best describes the person's overall capacity to carry
out each ADL. These answers may be different from what the person is actually
doing for themselves. Use your professional judgment.
G6.

Person Believes He/She Is Capable of Improved
Performance in Physical Function

Intent

To assess the likelihood that the person has the capacity for greater independence
and involvement in his or her care. Item G6 rests on the person's "belief;' but gives
you several ways to come to an opinion on this issue.

Process

Coding

Most important, ask the person. Assess for indications that the person thinks
he or she can be more self-sufficient. Ask family and health professionals what the
person has told them and how the person's behavior may indicate that the person
believes he or she has such capacity.
Do the person's statements seem reasonable? Is the person's description clear
and unequivocal? Could the person be more self-sufficient if mood or motivational
problems were addressed? Speak with caregivers. Assess whether the person's func­
tional performance has recently changed. Has there been an intervening acute epi­
sode? What is the likelihood that the person will recover from the current disease
or condition? Does the person believe that with the resolution of such problems he
or she could see an improvement in function?
0 No
1 Yes

G7.

Change in AOL Status as Compared to 90 Days Ago (or
Since Last Assessment If Less Than 90 Days Ago)

Intent

To determine whether the person's current activities of daily living (ADL) status
differs from the status of 9 0 days ago (or since the last assessment if that was less
than 90 days ago). These include, but are not limited to, changes in the person's level
of involvement in ADLs, as well as the amount and type of support received from
others. If the person is a new admission to a home care program, this item includes
changes during the period prior to admission.

Process

52

Talk to the person and caregiver. Ask the person to think about how well he or she
was able to do ADLs 90 days ago. How does the person's current ADL status com­
pare to 9 0 days ago? Note: Itmaybe helpfulto name the month that corresponds

Section G Functional Status

with the 90-day time frame. Some persons may have experienced an intermittent
change in status but this should not be considered in the assessment. Consider only
their current status as contrasted with their status 9 0 days ago.
Coding

Code for the most appropriate category. If there is a change in multiple domains,
code for the overall direction of change.
0 Improved
1 No change
2 Declined
8 Uncertain

68.

Drove Car (Vehicle) in the Last 90 Days

Intent

To evaluate a key aspect of community independence and determine whether the
person's driving is a concern. Note: interRAI has an algorithm that assesses whether
there should be a discussion with the person about the wisdom of continuing to
drive.

Definition

Drove car (vehicle) in the last 90 days-For example, the person drove to a store,
to visit, to a medical appointment.

Process

Ask the person about his or her driving and whether the person plans to continue
driving. Be aware that driving may be a sensitive issue. Certain conditions may
impair driving ability temporarily or on a more permanent basis.

Coding

0 No
1 Yes
Note: If the person does not drive, code "O" for "No'�

Section G Functional Status

53

Section H

Continence
H1.

Bladder Continence

Intent

To determine and record the person's pattern of bladder continence over the last 3
days.

Definition

Bladder continence is control over involuntary spillage of urine. This item describes
the person's current bladder continence pattern, taking into account any control
plans or devices, such as scheduled toileting plans, continence training programs,
or urinary devices. It does not refer to the person's ability to toilet him- or her­
self-for example, a person may require extensive assistance in toileting and still be
continent. Bladder incontinence includes any level of dribbling or wetting of urine.

Process

Review the person's bladder function with him or her. Explore whether the person
ever has difficulty making it to the bathroom in time, or dribbles or leaks urine, par­
ticularly when coughing, sneezing, laughing, or exercising. Whenever possible, have
this discussion in private. Control of bladder function is a sensitive subject, particu­
larly for persons who are struggling to maintain control. Many persons with poor
control will try to hide their problems out of embarrassment or fear of retribution or
even in an extreme case institutionalization. Others will not report problems because
they mistakenly believe that incontinence is a natural part of aging and that nothing
can be done to reverse the problem. Despite these common reactions to inconti­
nence, many persons are relieved when a health care professional shows enough con­
cern to ask about the nature of the problem in a sensitive, straightforward manner.
Validate continence patterns with people who know the person well, such as fam­
ily caregivers or aides who assist with dressing or laundry.

Coding

A six-level coding scale is used to describe continence patterns. Choose one
response to code the person's level of urinary continence over the last 3 days. Code
for the pattern of the person's actual bladder continence with a urinary device, if
used. Do not code the level of control the person might have received under opti­
mal circumstances.
0 Continent- Stays dry with or without any urinary management device and has
no accidental spillage.
1 Infrequently incontinent-Not incontinent over last 3 days, but does have a
recent history of incontinent episodes.
2 Occasionally incontinent-Less than daily episodes of bladder incontinence
(incontinent on 1-2 of the last 3 days).
3 Frequently incontinent-Incontinent daily, but some control present (the per­
son is not incontinent during each episode of urination). Example: During the
day, the person remains dry and is continent of urine. At night, the person wets
pants or bedding.
4 Incontinent-No control of bladder; multiple daily episodes all or almost all of
the time.
8 Did not occur-No urine output from bladder in last 3 days.

Section H Continence

55

Examples of How to Code Bladder Continence
Mr. Q was taken to the toilet after every meal, before bed, and once during the night. He
was never found wel.
Code: .tu = "0" = "Continent".

Mr. R had an indwelling catheter in place during the entire 3-day assessment period. He
was never found wet.
Code: Hl = "0" = "Continent", in this case with a urinary management device - the
device is noted under Item H2.

Although she is generally continent of urine, every once in a while (4 and 6 days ago over
lhe lasL week), Mrs. T did nol make il lo the bathroom to urinate in time after taking her
dailydiuretic pill.
Code: Hl = "l" = "lnfreque1ttly incontinent".

Mrs. A has an occasional ei,:>isode of urinary incontinence (generally less than daily), par­
ticularly late in the day when she is tired. Lo the last 2 days, she was not incontinent at all.
She was incontinent 3 days ago, however.
Code: Hl = "2" = "Occasionally incontinent".
Mrs. U has end-stage Alzheimer's disease. She is very frail and has stiff, painfuJ contrac­
tures of all extremities. She is primarily bedfast on a special water mattress and is turned
and repositioned hourly for comfort. In the last 3 days, she was not toileted and was incon­
tinent of urine for all episodes.
Code: Hl = "4" = "Incontinent''.

H2.

Urinary Management Device (Excludes Pads/Briefs)

Definitions

Intermittent catheter - A catheter that is inserted into the bladder the same way

as an indwelling catheter. It is only left in place until the bladder is empty of urine,
at which point it is removed. It will be administered several times per day.
External catheter - A urinary collection device worn over the penis or urethral

opening; for example, a condom.
Indwelling catheter - A catheter that is maintained within the bladder for the

purpose of continuous drainage of urine. Includes catheters inserted through the
urethra or by supra-pubic incision.
Cystostomy- An opening to the bladder made by a surgical incision and covered
by a urinary collection appliance (urostomy bag).
Nephrostomy -A tube, stent, or catheter that is used to provide urinary drain­

age when a ureter is obstructed. In some cases, the catheter drains urine out of a
person's body into a drainage bag. In other cases, the catheter drains urine directly
into the bladder.
Ureterostomy-A surgical urinary diversion, where the ureter(s) is detached from

the bladder and brought to the surface of the abdomen, with a urinary collection
device placed over it.

56

Section H Continence

Process

Coding

Ask the person or caregiver and check any clinical documentation. Be sure to ask
about any items that are usually hidden from view because they are worn under
street clothing (such as a ureterostomy collection bag).
0 None
1 Intermittent catheter
2 External catheter
3 Indwelling catheter
4 Cystostomy, nephrostomy, ureterostomy

H3.

Bowel Continence

Intent

To determine and record the person's pattern of bowel continence (control of invol­
untary spillage of stool) over the 3-day assessment period.

Definition

Bowel continence is the control of bowel function (including any leakage of
stool or fecal material) with or without bowel programs or appliances. This item
describes the person's bowel continence pattern with any scheduled toileting plans,
continence training programs, or appliances in use. It does not refer to the person's
ability to toilet him- or herself; a person can require extensive assistance in toileting
and still be continent of stool.

Process

Coding

The assessment for bowel continence should be completed concurrently with the
bladder continence review. Control of bowel function is also a sensitive issue. If
necessary, validate continence patterns with others who know the person.
0 Continent- Stays continent, with or without the use of an ostomy device.
1 Infrequently incontinent-Not incontinent over last 3 days, but does have
incontinent episodes.
2 Occasionally incontinent-Incontinent episodes less than daily.
3 Frequently incontinent-Incontinent daily, but person has some control.
4 Incontinent-No control present.
8 Did not occur-No bowel movement in the last 3 days.

H4.

Bowel Ostomy [Missouri Specific]

Intent

To document the presence of a bowel diversion to the external abdomen.

Definition

Any opening on the external abdomen (stoma) surgically created for the drainage of
fecal material. For example, colostomy or ileostomy.

Coding

0 No
1 Yes

Section H Continence

57

Section I

Diseases and Diagnoses
11.

Diseases and Diagnoses

Intent

To document the presence of diseases or infections relevant to the person's current
ADL status, cognitive status, mood or behavior status, medical treatments, nursing
monitoring, or risk of death. In general, these types of conditions are associated
with the type and level of care needed by the person. Do not include conditions that
have been resolved or no longer affect the person's functioning or care needs.

Definitions

Musculoskeletal
Ila.

Hip fractur e dur ing last 30 days (or since last assessment ifless than 30
days)-Includes any hip fracture that occurred during the last 30 days (or
since the last assessment, if that was less than 30 days ago) that continues to
have a relationship to current status, treatments, monitoring, etc. Hip frac­
ture diagnoses include femoral neck fractures, fractures of the trochanter,
and subcapital fractures.

Ilb. Other fracture during last 30 days (or since last assessment if less than
30 days)-Any fracture other than hip bone (for example, wrist) due to any
condition, such as falls or weakening of the bone as a result of cancer.
Neurological -Dementia
Ile.

Alzheimer 's disease-A degenerative, progressive, and irreversible demen­
tia that slowly erodes memory, geographic orientation, reasoning, and deci­
sion making.

Il d. Vascular dementia-A dementia caused by reduced or blocked blood flow
to the brain. Person typically presents with problems relating to memory,
reasoning, and decision making.
Ile.

Lewy body dementia-A dementia caused by deposits of Lewy body pro­
teins in nerve cells in the brain. Persons can present with problems in mem­
ory, decision making, hallucinations, delusions, and movement disorders.

Ilf.

Frontotemporal dementia-A group of disorders that affect the frontal and
temporal lobes of the brain. These disorders can be first manifested as early
as the fifth decade of life, with problematic symptoms including inappropri­
ate personality and social responses, as well as difficulties in the appropriate
use of language.

Ilg.

Other dementia, excluding Alzheimer's, vascular, Lewy body, and
Frontotemporal dementias-Includes diagnoses of organic brain sy n­
drome (OBS) or chronic brain syndrome (CBS), senility, senile dementia,
and dementia related to other neurological diseases (such as Pick's disease,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, etc.).

Section I Diseases and Diagnoses

59

Neurological -Other

llh. Multiple sclerosis -A disease in which there is demyelination throughout
the central nervous system. Typical symptoms are weakness, incoordination,
paresthesia, speech disturbances, and visual complaints.
lli.

Seizure disorders or epilepsy-Disorders of cerebral function that are
characterized by sudden episodes of altered consciousness, sensory changes,
motor activity, or inappropriate behavior.

llj.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI)-Injury to the brain, often caused by traffic
or other accidents, that can cause language impediment, seizures, amnesia,
functional impairments, and behavioral changes.

Ilk. Hemiplegia-Paralysis (temporary or permanent impairment of sensation,
function, motion) of both limbs on one side of the body. Usually caused by
cerebral hemorrhage, thrombosis, embolism, or tumor.
Ill.

Paraplegia -Paralysis (a temporary or permanent impairment of active
motion) of the lower part of the body, including both legs.

llm. Parkinson's disease-A disorder of the brain characterized by tremor and
difficulty with walking, movement, and coordination.
lln.

Quadriplegia-Paralysis (temporary or permanent impairment of sensa­
tion, function, motion) of all four limbs and trunk.

llo.

Stroke/CVA-A sudden rupture or blockage of a blood vessel within the
brain, causing serious bleeding or local obstruction, leading to regional cell
death and damage.

llp. Aphasia-A speech or language disorder caused by disease or injury to the
brain, resulting in difficulty expressing thoughts (speaking or writing) and
difficulty understanding spoken or written language.
Intellectual/Developmental Disability

Ilq.

Down syndrome -A chromosomal condition resulting in varying degrees
of intellectual impairment and developmental delay. People with Down syn­
drome are at increased risk for certain health conditions, including heart
defects, gastroesophageal reflux, celiac disease, and early onset Alzheimer's
disease.

llr.

Autism spectrum disorder -A group of complex neurodevelopmental
disorders characterized by repetitive and characteristic patterns of behavior
and difficulties with social communication and interaction. The symptoms
are present from early childhood and affect daily functioning.

lls.

Other intellectual disability (organic, non-organic, or cause unknown)

Cardiac or Pulmonary
llt.

Coronary heart disease-A chronic condition marked by thickening and
loss of elasticity of the coronary artery, caused by deposits of plaque contain­
ing cholesterol, lipoid material, and lipophages.

llu. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)-Any long-standing
condition that impairs airflow in and out of the lungs (emphysema, chronic
bronchitis, or asthma).

60

Section I Diseases and Diagnoses

Ilv.

Heart failure-A condition in which the heart is unable to deliver enough
oxygenated blood to meet the demands of the body, or can only do so through
fluid retention to expand blood volume, leading to an accumulation of fluid
in the body tissues and cavities and lung congestion.

Psychiatric
Ilw. Anxiety-A nonpsychotic mental disorder. There are five types, which
include:
• Generalized anxiety disorder
• Obsessive-compulsive disorder
• Panic disorder
• Phobias
• Post-traumatic stress disorder
Ilx.

Bipolar disorder -Includes documentation of clinical diagnosis of either
manic depression or bipolar disorder. "Bipolar disorder" is the current term
for manic-depressive illness.

11y.

Depression -A mood disorder often characterized by a depressed mood
(for example, the person feels sad or empty, appears tearful); decreased abil­
ity to think or concentrate; loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities;
insomnia or hypersomnia; loss of energy; change in appetite; or feelings of
hopelessness, worthlessness, or guilt. May also include thoughts of death or
suicide.

Ilz.

Schizophrenia -A disturbance characterized by delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized speech, grossly disorganized behavior, disordered thinking, or
flat affect. This category includes schizophrenia subtypes (for example, para­
noid, disorganized, catatonic, undifferentiated, residual).

llaa. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)-A mental health condition devel­
oped after experiencing or witnessing a life-threatening event, such as combat,
a natural disaster, a car accident, or sexual assault. Symptoms vary and may
include sleep disorders, extreme anxiety, guilt, and feelings of detachment.
Infections
Ilbb. Pneumonia during last 30 days-Inflammation of the lungs, most com­
monly of bacterial or viral origin.
11cc. Urinary tract infection during last 30 days -Includes chronic and acute
symptomatic infection(s) in the last 30 days. Code only if you are aware there
is current supporting documentation and significant laboratory findings in
the clinical record.
Il dd. COVID-19 diagnosis during last 90 days-COVID-19 is caused by a
severe acute syndrome of coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. It can manifest from
mild to severe, and places the person at an elevated risk of death.
Ilee. HIV/AIDS-HIV is a virus that damages the immune system, affecting the
body's ability to fight disease. AIDS is the most advanced stage of HIV.
Other
Ilff. Cancer -Any malignant growth or tumor caused by abnormal and uncon­
trolled cell division. The malignant growth or tumor may spread to other
parts of the body through the lymphatic system or the bloodstream.
Section I Diseases and Diagnoses

61

Ilgg. Diabetes mellitus Type 1 -Disease characterized by the person's own
immune system attacking and destroying insulin-producing cells of the pan­
creas. Persons will have to take insulin; thus, this type of diabetes is called
insulin-dependent (IDDM). Some of the symptoms include increased per­
sistent thirst, excessive discharge of urine, weight loss, and fatigue.
Ilhh. Diabetes mellitus Type 2 -In this type of diabetes, the pancreas usually
produces some insulin, but it is either not enough or the body does not use
it properly. Control involves dietary programs (NIDDM or AODM) and the
use of insulin. Possible complications can include heart disease and strokes.
Ilii.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) (also known as chronic renal failure)-A
condition usually caused by a long-term disease, such as high blood pressure
or diabetes, that slowly damages the kidneys and reduces their function over
time.

Process

Talk to the person and family. Review any available clinical records. If available,
consult with the person's primary physician or nurse practitioner.

Coding

For all diseases present in Item Ila through Item Ilii, select the most appropriate
code from those listed below.
0 Not present
1 Primary diagnosis/diagnoses for current stay-One or more diagnoses that
are the main reason(s) used to support and justify services being provided.
2 Diagnosis present, receiving active treatment-Treatment can include drug
therapy, therapeutic rehabilitation services, or other medical or skilled nursing
interventions such as wound care, administration of intravenous antibiotics, or
suctioning.
3 Diagnosis present, monitored but no active treatment-Person has a diagno­
sis that is being monitored (for example, with laboratory tests or vital signs, or
scheduled assessment for consequential symptomatic indicators), but no active
treatment is being provided at the present time. This category may include con­
ditions that are of long standing but that still influence functional status, as long
as the condition is being monitored.

1 2.

Other Major Disease Diagnoses

Intent

To document the presence of MAJOR diseases or infections not listed in Item Il
that influence the care required, the trajectory of care needs, and life expectancy.
These conditions require active treatment and if not treated lead to MAJOR mor­
bidity, suffering, or death. In addition, if not managed correctly, they may also lead
to harm to others (for example, an infectious disease).

Coding

Write the diagnosis on the two blank lines provided; we assume that there will be
few additional MAJOR diagnoses. Record the appropriate disease code ("1", "2", or
"3") in the single box that follows. Then, enter the ICD-CM code in the boxes to the
right. You may need to consult a specialist in medical records or medical coding to
determine the appropriate ICD-CM code. The ICD code you use may be specific to
your country. For example, the United States uses ICD-10-CM, while Canada uses
ICD-10-CA.

62

Section I Diseases and Diagnoses

1 Primary diagnosis/ diagnoses for current stay-One or more diagnoses that
are the main reason(s) used to support and justify services being provided.
2 Diagnosis present, receiving active treatment-Treatment can include drug
therapy, therapeutic rehabilitation services, or other medical or skilled nursing
interventions such as wound care, administration of intravenous antibiotics, or
suctioning.
3 Diagnosis present, monitored but no active treatment-Person has a diagno­
sis that is being monitored (for example, with laboratory tests or vital signs, or
scheduled assessment for consequential symptomatic indicators), but no active
treatment is being provided at the present time. This category may include con­
ditions that are of long standing but that still influence functional status, as long
as the condition is being monitored.

Section I Diseases and Diagnoses

63

Section J

Health Conditions
J1 .

Falls

Intent

To determine whether the person has a history of falling. Persons who have sus­
tained at least one fall are at risk of future falls. Falls are a common cause of morbid­
ity and mortality among persons receiving home care. Serious injury results in from
6% to 10% of falls, with hip fractures accounting for approximately one-half of all
serious injuries.

Definition

Fall-Any unintentional change in position where the person ends up on the floor,

ground, or other lower level; includes falls that occur while being assisted by others.

Process

First assessment (new admissions)- Consult with the person and the person's

family. Review any available clinical documentation.

Reassessments -Review any available records for the person. Consult with the

person, an available family member, and any formal care workers. Sometimes a
person will fall and, believing that he or she "just tripped;' will get up and not report
the event to anyone. Therefore, do not rely solely on available clinical records but
also ask the person directly if he or she has fallen during the indicated time frame.
Accept statements by the person or a family member.
Coding

Enter the number of falls that occurred during the time periods of the last 30 days
(Item Jla), 31-90 days (Item Jlb), and 91-180 days (Item Jlc).
0 No falls
I One fall
2 Two or more falls
Jla.

Last 30 days

Jlb.

31-90 days

Jlc.

91-180 days

J2 .

Any Fall with Major Consequences within Last 90 Days

Intent

A minority of falls -less than 10%-result in a referral to a hospital and some sort
of consequential trauma to the body. This item records all such events that occurred
within the last 90 days.

Definition

Major consequences -Examples include fractures (for example, of hip, shoulder,

forearm, spine), concussion, subdural hematoma, other internal bleeding, restric­
tion in walking for a week or more.

Section J Health Conditions

65

Coding

If the person fell in the last 90 days, code for whether any consequential outcome
occurred. Note: If there was no fall in the last 90-day period, code "O" for "No'.
0 No
1 Yes

J3.

Limits Activities Because of Fear of Falling

Intent

To determine if, either due to a history of falling or a sense of personal frailty, the
person limits how he or she engages in activities within his or her residential and
neighborhood environment. This item records such limitations as the person seeks
to prevent future falls by not putting him- or herself at risk.

Definition

Examples include limit going outside, will only go out with others, or limit moving
inside. The person may refuse to walk to a house of worship or a senior center, may
limit how far or how often he or she walks in the home.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

J4.

Problem Frequency

Intent

To record the frequency of specific problems or symptoms that affect or could affect
the person's health or functional status and to identify risk factors for illnesses, acci­
dents, and functional decline. These problems may be related to medication side
effects.

Definitions

Balance
J4a.

Difficult or unable to move self to standing position unassisted

J4b.

Difficult or unable to turn self around and face the opposite direction
when standing

J4c.

Dizziness -The person experiences a sensation of unsteadiness, that he or
she is turning, or that the surroundings are whirling around.

J4d.

Unsteady gait-A gait that places the person at risk of falling. Unsteady
gaits take many forms. The person may appear unbalanced or walk with a
sway. Other gaits may have uncoordinated or jerking movements. Examples
of unsteady gaits include fast gaits with large, careless movements; abnor­
mally slow gaits with small shuffling steps; or wide-based gaits with halting,
tentative steps.

Cardiac or Pulmonary

66

J4e.

Chest pain/discomfort-The person experiences any type of pain in the
chest area, which may be described as burning, pressure, stabbing, vague
discomfort, tight chest, radiating pain, for example.

J4f.

Difficulty clearing airway secretions-In the last 3 days the person reports
being unable, or has been observed to be unable, to cough effectively to expel
respiratory secretions (for example, secondary to weakness or pain) or has

Section J Health Conditions

been unable to mobi lize secretions or sputum from mouth (for example, sec­
ondary to dysphagia or pain) or tracheostomy (for example, secondary to
viscosity of sputum; inability to physically remove secretions from tracheos­
tomy entrance). Examples include a person with pneumonia who is too weak
to cough and expel sputum or a person with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) who requires suction ing to manage secretions.
Psychiatric
J4g.

Abnormal thought process -When the person is observed, there are

apparent abnormalities in the form or way in which thoughts are expressed.
Included are indicators such as loosening of associations, thought blocking,
flight of ideas, tangentiality, circumstantiality, clang association, incoher­
ence, neologisms, punning, etc.
Loose associations -The person jumps from one topic to another with­

out an apparent connection between the topics.

Thought blocking- The person suddenly stops in the middle of a sen­

tence and is unable to recover what he or she intended to say or to com­
plete other thoughts.

Fl ight of ideas -The person's thoughts are expressed so quickly that the

listener has difficulty keeping up.

Tangential ity- The person digresses from the subject under discussion

and introduces thoughts that seem unrelated, oblique, or irrelevant.

Circumstantiality- The

person exhibits lack of goal-directedness,
incorporates unnecessary details, and has difficulty getting to an end
point in the conversation.

Clang association -The connection between the person's thoughts is

tenuous. The person may use rhyming and punning in his or her speech.

Incoherence -The person's speech is unclear or confused. The commu­

nication does not make sense to the intended listener.

Neologism -The person makes up a word, which may be condensed

from several words. Neologisms are unintelligible to the listener.

Punning- The person uses words that are similar in sound, but different

in meaning.

J4h.

Delusions -Fixed, false beliefs not shared by others that the person holds

J4i.

Hallucinations -The person has false perceptions that occur in the absence

even when there is obvious proof or evidence to the contrary. For example,
the person may believe that he or she is terminally ill, that his or her spouse
is having an affair, or that food served at a restaurant or congregate dining
room is poisoned.
of any real stimuli. A hallucination may be auditory (for example, hearing
voices), visual (for example, seeing people or animals), tactile (for example,
feeling bugs crawling over the skin), olfactory (for example, smelling poison­
ous fumes), or gustatory (for example, experiencing strange tastes).

GI Status
J4j.

Acid reflux -The regurgit ation of small amounts of acid from the stomach

Section J Health Condit ions

67

to the throat. Usually accompanied by a burning sensation in the throat or a
sour taste in the mouth.

J4k. Constipation -No bowel movement in 3 days, or difficult passage of hard
stool.
J41.

Diarrhea-The frequent elimination of watery stools, regardless of cause.

J4m. Vomiting-Regurgitation of stomach contents, regardless of etiology (for
example, drug toxicity, influenza, psychogenic).
Sleep Problems
J4n.

Difficulty fa lling asleep or staying asleep; waking up too early; restless­
ness; non-restful sleep-For example, the person:
• Experiences an extended time gap between the point at which he or she
attempted to fall asleep and the time at which sleep was actually initiated;
• Wakes up well before the desired time due to some factor inherent to him
or her (exclude situations in which the person is awakened by some exter­
nal source);
• Experiences sleep that is accompanied by repeated tossing and turning or
dreaming that causes motion or wakefulness, for example, such that the
person does not feel rested when awake; or
• Is easily awakened during sleep by sounds or movements, and experi­
ences one or more periods of awakening after sleep is initiated.

J4o. Too much sleep-An excessive amount of sleep that interferes with the
person's normal functioning.
Other
J4p. Fever-A rise in the person's body temperature, frequently as a result of
infection. Includes precipitous rise in temperature with feeling of being cold
and experiencing uncontrolled shaking.
J4q.

Sore throat-Pain, irritation, scratchiness in throat. It can occur with and
without swallowing, although it is often worse when swallowing. Accompa­
nied with a hoarse voice.

J4r.

Cough -Included are new, continuous, or worsening coughs. A cough is a
sudden hacking sound whose purpose is to clear airways of mucus and irri­
tants.

J4s.

Headache -Painful sensation in any region of the head. Includes a sense of
pressure, dull aches, sharp pain, or throbbing pain. Includes migraine head­
ache.

J4t.

Gastrointestinal or urogenital bleeding (GI or GU bleeding)-"Gastro­
intestinal (GI) bleeding" is any documented bleeding as diagnosed by a gas­
trointestinal evaluation, or any evidence of current bleeding through rectal
exam or testing. Bleeding may be frank (such as bright red blood) or occult
(such as black stools). "Genitourinary (GU) bleeding" is bleeding that occurs
anywhere along the genitourinary tract. Urine that is dark or cloudy should
be tested for the presence of blood. There may also be visible blood in the
person's urine or frank, bright red blood coming from the urethral opening.

J4u. Hygiene -Unusually poor hygiene, unkempt, disheveled. The person is
observed to have unusually poor hygiene well beyond what is considered
culturally appropriate. Poor hygiene puts the person at risk for skin break­
down and has other health and psychological ramifications.
J4v.

68

Peripheral edema-Abnormal buildup of fluid in feet, ankles, legs, or sacral
area.

Section J Health Conditions

Process

Ask the person -he or she may not have told others of his or her symptoms. Ask
family members or caregivers. Review any available clinical records.

Coding

0 Not present
1 Present but not exhibited i n last 3 days
2 Exhibi ted on 1 oflast 3 days
3 Exhibited on 2 of last 3 days
4 Exhibi ted daily in last 3 days

JS .

Dyspnea (Shortness of Breath)

Intent

To describe gradations of dyspnea.

Definition

The person has reported being, or has been observed to be, breathless or "short of
breath:' Includes new onset of shortness of breath as well as ongoing conditions.
"Moderate activities" include some type of physical activity, such as walking a long
distance, climbing two flights of stairs, or gardening. "Normal day-to-day activities"
include all ADLs (bathing, toileting, etc.) and IADLs (meal preparation, shopping,
etc.).

Process

Ask the person if he or she has experienced shortness of breath. If the answer is
affirmative, determine if the sy mptom occurred with strenuous activity, during nor­
mal day-to-day activity, or when resting. If the person is unable to respond, review
the clinical record and consult with caregivers and family members.

Coding

Select the appropriate code from the list below. Code for the most severe occur­
rence during the last 3 days. If the symptom was absent over the last 3 days but
would have been present had the person undertaken activity, code according to the
activity level (day-to-day or moderate) that would normally have caused the person
to experience shortness of breath.
0 Absence of symptom
1 Absent at rest, but present when performed moderate activities
2 Absent at rest, but present when performed normal day-to-day activities
3 Present at rest

J6 .

Fatigue

Intent

To describe gradations of fatigue or impaired stamina. Fatigue is associated with
some chronic diseases and end-stage conditions.

Definition

Fatigue-An

Process

Use observation or discussion with the person or others, exploring how the person's
daily schedule impacts on his or her energy levels. Explore both types of fatigue:
physical and mental. Physical tiredness results in reduced energy, whereas mental
or cognitive tiredness may result in reduced concentration and mental restlessness.

overwhelming or sustained sense of exhaustion, resulting in
decreased capacity for physical or mental work.

Section J Health Conditions

69

Coding

Select the appropriate code from the list below. If fatigue was absent over the last 3
days but would have been present had the person undertaken activity, code accord­
ing to the activity level that would normally have caused the person to experience
fatigue.
0 None

1 Minimal - Diminished energy but completes normal day-to-day activities.
2 Moderate -Due to diminished energy, unable to finish normal day-to-day

activities.
3 Severe -Due to diminished energy, unable to start some normal day-to-day

activities.
4 Unable to commence any normal day-to-day activities -Due to diminished
energy.

J7.

Pain Symptoms

Intent

To record the frequency and intensity of any pain the person may be experiencing.
This item can be used to identify indicators of pain, as well as to monitor the per­
son's response to pain management interventions. A substantial number of persons
with pain receive inadequate or no treatment. In particular, persons with chronic,
non-cancer-related pain are often overlooked and not treated. One of the biggest
reasons for this is that many persons mistakenly believe that pain is to be expected
as one ages, or that nothing can be done to relieve their pain. Pain control often
enables rehabilitation, greater socialization, and activity involvement.

Definitions

Pain -'�n unpleasant sensory and emotional experience" that is generally asso­

ciated with actual or potential tissue damage. Pain refers to any type of physical
discomfort in any part of the body. Pain may be localized to one area or may be
more generalized. It may be acute or chronic, it may be continuous or intermittent
(comes and goes), or it may occur at rest or with movement. The pain experience is
subjective; pain is whatever the person says it is.
Shows evidence of pain-Observation of symptoms or indicators by others,

because the person either does not complain or is unable to verbalize or describe
symptoms.
Process

70

Pain is highly subjective. There are no objective markers or tests to indicate when
someone is having pain, or to measure its severity. What a person experiences may
not be proportional to the type or extent of the underlying tissue damage. Some­
times a specific cause for chronic pain cannot be identified. Regardless, unless the
person refuses, pain must always be treated, even if its cause is unknown.
The most accurate and reliable evidence of the existence of pain and its intensity
is what the person tells you. Even in cognitively impaired persons, self -reports of
pain should be considered reliable.
The assessor may not get an accurate answer if you simply ask "Are you in
pain?" A person may think of "pain" as a more intense experience after an acute
event-such as what may be experienced after surgery or spraining an ankle. For
example, a woman may have a sore foot that "acts up" when she pivots to transfer
to her wheelchair or the toilet but that does not bother her most of the time. Such a
person might deny being "in pain:' Persons often use different words in describing
pain, referring to what they're feeling as "discomfort:' "burning:' "hurting:' "aching:'
"tightness;' "heaviness:' "soreness;' or a "twinge" or "pang:'

Section J Health Conditions

If the person is unable to tell you if he or she is experiencing some type of pain­
ful sensation, observe the person for indicators of pain such as moaning, wincing,
or guarding. In some persons, the presence of pain can be hard to discern. For
example, persons with dementia may not be able to verbalize that they are feeling
pain, although they may manifest pain by particular behaviors such as calling out
or resisting care. Although such behaviors may not be indicative solely of pain, the
assessor needs to make a determination if the behaviors are secondary to pain. If
necessary, ask those who have had frequent contact with the person whether he or
she complained or showed evidence of pain in the last 3 days. However, first ask the
person directly about frequency and intensity.
Use your clinical judgment when coding. If you have difficulty determining the
exact frequency or intensity of pain, code for the more severe level. Persons having
pain will usually require further evaluation to determine the cause and to iden­
tify interventions that promote comfort. You never want to miss an opportunity to
relieve pain.
J7a.

Frequency with which person complains or shows evidence of pain

Definition

Measures how often the person experiences pain (reports or shows evidence of
pain); includes grimacing, teeth clenching, moaning, withdrawal when touched,
and other nonverbal signs suggesting pain.

Coding

0 No pain
1 Present recently but not exhibited in last 3 days
2 Exhibited on 1-2 oflast 3 days
3 Exhibited daily in last 3 days

J7b.

Intensity of highest level of pain present

Definition

Measures the level of pain reported by or observed in the person.

Coding

0 No pain
1 Mild
2 Moderate
3 Severe
4 Times when pain is horrible or excruciating

J7c.

Breakthrough pain

Definition

The person experienced a sudden, acute flare-up of pain one or more times in the
last 3 days. Breakthrough pain might appear as a dramatic increase in the level of
pain above that addressed by ongoing analgesics, or the recurrence of pain associ­
ated with end-of-dose failure.

Coding

0 No
1 Yes

Section J Health Conditions

71

J 8.

Instability of Conditions

Intent

To determine if the person's disease or health conditions present over the last 3 days
are acute, unstable, or deteriorating.

Definitions

J8a.

Conditions/diseases make cognitive, ADL, mood, or behavior patterns
unstable (fluctuating, precarious, or deteriorating) -Denotes the chang­
ing and variable nature of the person's condition or the difficulty of achiev­
ing a balance between treatments for multiple conditions. For example, a
person may experience different levels of pain or have variable responses to
the analgesic effect of pain medications. On "good days" over the last 3 days,
he or she will participate in ADLs, be in a good mood, and enjoy preferred
leisure activities. On "bad days;• he or she will be dependent on others for
care, be agitated, cry, and so on. The person may also have a condition, such
as ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, or multiple sclerosis, that causes
pain or impairs mobility or sensation, resulting in increased dependence on
others and depression.

J8b.

Experiencing an acute episode or a flare-up of a recurrent or chronic
problem -The person is symptomatic for an acute health condition (such
as a new myocardial infarction, adverse drug reaction, influenza, or delir­
ium) or recurrent acute condition (such as aspiration pneumonia or urinary
tract infection) . Also included are persons who are experiencing an exac­
erbation or flare-up of a chronic condition (for example, new-onset short­
ness of breath in someone with a history of asthma; increased foot swelling
and confusion in a person with heart failure; acute joint pain and swelling
in a person with arthritis for many years); or a shingles flare-up. This type
of acute episode usually is of sudden onset, has a time-limited course, and
requires evaluation by a physician and a significant increase in licensed nurs­
ing monitoring.

J8c.

End-stage disease, 6 or fewer months to live- The person or family has
been told that in the clinical judgment of the physician, the person has end­
stage disease with approximately 6 or fewer months to live.

Process

Consult with the person and the person's family. Review any clinical records. Use
your clinical judgment to determine whether it is appropriate to ask the person
about whether he or she has an "end-stage disease" (Item J8c).

Coding

0 No
1 Yes

J 9.

Self-Repor ted Health

Process

Ask the person, "In general, how would you rate your health?" Record the person's
response according to one of the categories below. Do not code based on your own
inferences about the person's physical health and do not record ratings given by
family, friends, or other informants. This item should be treated strictly as a self­
report measure. If the person is unable or refuses to respond, do not dwell on the
item; instead, code that the person could not (would not) respond.

Coding

0 Excellent
1 Good

72

Section J Health Conditions

2 Fair
3 Poor
8 Person could not (would not) respond

J10.

Tobacco and Alcohol

J10a.

Smokes tobacco daily

Intent

To determine whether the person smokes tobacco.

Definition

Tobacco -Refers to cigar, cigarette, or any other tobacco product that is inhaled.
Note: Does not include vaping or use of chewing tobacco.

Process

This information may be sensitive to the person. Begin by asking the person about
tobacco usage, with a simple nonjudgmental question, "Do you smoke?" If yes,
determine the frequency. Address this issue in a gentle way to avoid the person feel­
ing judged. If possible, validate tobacco usage with a family member or caregiver.
This discussion should not take place in front of the person.

Coding

0 No
I Not in last 3 days but is usually a daily smoker
2 Yes

J10b.

Alcohol

Intent

To determine if a person's consumption of alcohol is a potential problem.

Definitions

Alcohol-Includes the highest number of beer, wine, mixed drinks, liquor, and
liqueurs the person had in a "single sitting" during the last 14 days.
Single sitting -Refers to any given point in time (for example, at dinner, after
work, while out at a social event, while watching television).

Process

Ask the person directly about whether he or she consumes alcohol. Consult with a
family member if necessary. Sometimes it is prudent to talk to the person and fam­
ily separately. Start by asking the person, "Do you drink alcoholic drinks?" If he or
she says yes, then ask, "When you look back over the last 14 days, what is the high­
est number of drinks you had in a single sitting?"

Coding

Code for the highest number of drinks ingested by the person at one sitting over the
last 14 days.
0 None
I I

2 2-4
3 5 or more

Section J Health Conditions

73

Section K

Oral and N utritional Status
K1 .

Estimated Height and Weight [Measurement Units A re
Country Specific to USA]

Intent

To record the person's current height and weight in order to monitor nutrition,
hydration status, and weight stability over time. For example, a person who has
had edema may experience an expected weight loss as a result of taking a diuretic.
Weight loss can also be the intended result of limiting caloric intake and partici­
pating in an exercise program, or the unintended consequence of poor intake and
malnutrition.
Record height in inches (Item Kla) and weight in pounds (Item Klb). Base
weight on most recent measure in the last 30 days.

K1a.

Height

Process

Height is measured in inches (note: in many countries measured in centimeters).
Either take the person's self-report or assess yourself with a tape measure or other
device. If the person's self-report seems inaccurate, consider measuring using a tape
measure.
Round height up to the nearest whole inch. Measure height consistently over
time in accordance with standard agency practice (shoes off, etc.).

Coding

Enter one digit in each box.

K1 b.

Weight

Process

Base weight on most recent estimated weight in pounds measured within the last
30 days (note: in many countries measured in kilos). Round the person's weight
upward to the nearest whole pound. In most instances, a self-report of weight is
acceptable. However, if the self-report appears to be inaccurate, you may weigh the
person in accordance with standard agency practice (shoes on or off, etc.). In the
unusual instance where this is required assess yourself using a calibrated scale (if
available). In its absence, use your own or other's best estimate.

Coding

Enter one digit in each box. If the person weighs less than 100 pounds, use "O" as a
filler digit in the first box.

K.2.

Nutritional Issues

Intent

To identify specific problems, conditions, and risk factors related to the intake of
food and nourishment that affect or could affect the person's health or functional
status. Such problems can often be reversed and the person can improve.

Section K Oral and Nutritional Status

75

K2a.

Weight loss of 5% or more in LAST 30 DAYS, or 1 0% or more in
LAST 1 80 DAYS

I ntent

To explore marked declines in weight. Such weight loss can indicate failure to thrive,
a potentially serious medical problem, or poor nutritional intake due to physical,
cognitive, or social factors.

Process

Ask the person or family about weight changes over the last 30 and 180 days. Use
actual records of weight if available. A subjective estimate of weight change from
the person (assuming he or she retains the ability to communicate such informa­
tion) or caregiver can be used if no written records are available. Identify ing a par­
ticular time approximately 6 months earlier (such as "compared to last New Year 's")
may help the person remember his or her approximate weight 180 days ago. You
may be able to help the person answer the question by asking "How much weight
do you think you have lost?" Then mentally compare this with the reported or your
estimated current weight of the person. You can also ask, "Have you lost a lot of
weight? Do you feel much thinner or weaker?" or "Your clothes seem very loose on
you. Were you much heavier 6 months ago?"

Example of How to Calculate Weight Loss
To calculate the percent of weight loss, divide the amount of weight the person has lost by
the person's previous weight, and then m ultiply that n umber by 100 to get the percent of
weight loss. Round weights upward to th e nearest whole pound.
For example, you have on record that 6 months ago the person weighed 144 lb.
Currently the person weig hs I28 lb, a loss of 16 lb.
16 / 144 = . l l
0. l l x 100 = 1 1%
The person has a weight loss of 1 J % in 6 months.

K2b.

Dehydrated

Process

Identifying dehydration can be difficult. Record your clinical judgment based on
signs and symptoms (for example, severe vomiting over a short period of time).
Alternatively, laboratory results indicatin g dehydration may be available (i.e., BUN/
creatinine ratio of > 25 [note that the standard for this ratio value can be country
specific]).

K2c.

Fluid intake less than four 8 oz cups per day (or less than 1,000 cc
per day)

Definition

Person did not consume all/almost all fluids during the last 3 days.

K2d.

Fluid output exceeds input

Definition

Fluid loss exceeds the amount of fluids the person takes in (for example, loss from
vomiting, fever, or diarrhea that exceeds fluid replacement).

76

Section K Oral and Nutritional Status

Coding

Select the appropriate code for each of the above (K2a-K2d).

K2e.

Physician ordered therapeutic diet [Missouri Item]

Intent

The intent of this item is to determine whether a specific diet, as explicitly ordered
and documented by a personal physician, is implemented for the purpose of alter­
ing a person's dietary (food and drink) intake to support medical management of
a diagnosis. This does not include mechanically altering diets to avoid swallowing
problems or aspiration.

Definition

Weighing, measuring, calculating, and/or restricting select nutrient components
(e.g. calories, fat, sodium, and potassium).

Coding

Select appropriate code.
0 No
1 Yes

K3.

Mode of Nutritional Intake

Intent

The ability to swallow safely can be affected by many disease processes and by func­
tional decline. Alterations in one's ability to swallow could result in choking and
aspiration, both of which can cause morbidity and mortality. Often persons with
swallowing difficulties require altered consistencies of food and fluids in order to
ingest nutrition by mouth. This item details any dietary modifications necessary to
address swallowing difficulties.

Definitions

Feeding tube -Presence of any type of tube that can deliver food/nutritional
substances/fluids/medications directly into the gastrointestinal system. Examples
include, but are not limited to, nasogastric tubes, gastrostomy tubes, jejunostomy
tubes, and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes.
Mechanically altered diet-A diet specifically prepared to alter the consistency
of food in order to facilitate oral intake. Examples include soft solids, pureed foods,
and ground meat. Diets for persons who can only take liquids that have been thick­
ened to prevent choking are also included in this definition.
Parenteral feeding only-Includes all types of parenteral feedings, such as total
parenteral nutrition (TPN) and peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN). Parenteral
feeding involves the intravenous administration of nutrition for persons who can­
not absorb enough food by mouth and feeding tube to maintain good nutritional
status.

Process

Observe and talk with the person, family, or caregiver. If available, review the per­
son's clinical record.

Coding

Using the codes provided, indicate which item best describes the dietary prescrip­
tion used to accommodate swallowing difficulties.
0 Normal-Person swallows all types of foods.
1 Modified independent-For example, liquid is sipped, or person takes limited
solid food; need for modification may be unknown.
(continued)

Section K Oral and Nutritional Status

77

(continued)

2 Requires diet modification to swallow solid food-For example, mechanical
diet (puree, minced, etc.) is required, or person is only able to ingest specific
foods.
3 Requires modification to swallow liquids -For example, liquids must be
thickened.
4 Can swallow only pureed solids AND thickened liquids
5 Combined oral and parenteral or oral and any tube feeding
6 Nasogastric tube feeding only
7 Abdominal feeding tube only-For example, a PEG tube.
8 Parenteral feeding only-Includes all types of parenteral feedings, such as
total parenteral nutrition (TPN).
9 Activity did not occur-Person did not eat or receive any form of nutritional
supplementation during the last 3 days.

K4.

Swallowing Problems

Intent

To document oral complications in swallowing.

Definition
Process

Aspiration -Accidentally breathing food or liquid into airways; in extreme case,
food stuck in throat (unable to cough out).
Ask the person, family member, nurse assistant/personal care worker, or a dietary
staff member if present.
K4a. Aspiration
K4b. Food or fluid escapes from or dribbles from mouth during eating or
drinking
K4c. Ate one or fewer meals a day in AT LEAST 2 OF LAST 3 DAYS
K4d. Noticeable decrease in the amount of food person normally eats or fluids usually consumes

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

KS.

Oral Issues

Intent

To record any oral problems present in the last 3 days.

Definitions

K5a. Dry mouth-Whenever possible, ask the person (for example, ask: "Do you
have dry mouth?"). The person reports having a dry mouth or difficulty in
moving a food bolus in his or her mouth.
K5b. Difficulty chewing-Whenever possible, ask the person (for example, ask:
"Do you have difficulty chewing?"). The person is unable to chew food easily

78

Section K Oral and Nutritional Status

and without pain or difficulties, regardless of cause (for example, the person
might use ill-fitting dentures or might have a neurologically impaired chew­
ing mechanism, temporomandibular joint pain, or a painful tooth).
Coding

Code for problem present in last 3 days.
0 Not present
1 Present recently but not exhibited in last 3 days
2 Exhibited on 1 of last 3 days
3 Exhibited on 2 oflast 3 days
4 Exhibited daily in last 3 days

K6.

Dental/Oral Cavity Issues

Intent

To record any oral problems present in the last 3 days. To determine whether assis­
tance with oral hygiene is required and whether referral to a dentist is necessary.

Definitions

K6a. Broken, loosely fitted denture(s) (removable prosthesis)- The person
has a nonfunctional denture that was intended to replace all or some of the
teeth of the upper or lower jaw. A denture is removable by the person or a
helper.
K6b. Broken, decayed, fragmented, or loose natural teeth- The person has
natural teeth that are broken, decayed (orange/brown cavities that can be
surrounded by a white zone), fragmented (a piece of the tooth is missing), or
loose (tooth is movable when touched). This does not include a small chip
that has no impact on the person.

Process

Code for conditions based on self-report and oral cavity review. Ask the person
about difficulties in the item areas.

Coding

0 No
1 Yes

Section K Oral and Nutritional Status

79

Section L

Skin Condition
Intent

L1 .
Intent
Definitions

To determine the condi tion of the person's skin, identify the presence and stage of
ulcers, document other skin conditions, and note any foot problems that may be
present.

Most Severe Pressure Ulcer/Injury
To record the highest stage of pressure ulcers/injuries on any part of the body pres­
ent in the last 3 days.
Pressure ulcer/injury-Any lesion caused by unrelieved pressure. Pressure ulcers
usually occur over bony prom inences and are staged to classify the degree of tissue
damage observed.
Any area of persistent skin redness -An area of skin that appears continually
reddened and does not disappear when pressure is relieved. There is no break in the
skin. Also known as "Stage 1:•
Partial loss of skin layers-A partial-thickness loss of skin that presents clinically
as an abrasion, blister, or shallow crater. Also known as "Stage 2:•
Deep craters in the skin -A full thickness of skin is lost, exposing the subcuta­
neous tissues. Presents as a deep crater with or without undermining of adjacent
tissue. Also known as "Stage 3:'
Breaks in skin exposing muscle or bone-A full thickness of skin and subcutane­
ous tissue is lost, exposing muscle or bone. Also known as "Stage 4:'

Process

Section L Skin Condition

Review the person's record and as necessary consult with person, family, or care­
giver about the presence of one of these major skin problems.
Consult with the person and family about the presence of an ulcer. They are the
primary source of this information. If an ulcer is present, use the above definitions
as the basis of your discussion.
In an unusual situation, a skin exam may be called for, assuming your agency sup­
ports such a review. For example, the person or family member says that an ulcer is
newly present, it has not been reviewed by a health professional, and you are invited
to check on the extent of skin injury. Note: If you have not been trained to complete
such a review, say so, and suggest that the person speak with a health professional.
Even if you are trained, recognize that it could be difficult to examine the person's
entire skin, as you are a guest in the person's home. In most instances, a referral to
their physician would be the best option.
Bottom line, assume that for persons who are cognitively intact, you can get good
information about their skin condition from the person without conducting a skin
examination.
In the unlikely event that you do proceed with a skin examination, recognize
that for a chair-bound or bedfast person, it is necessary to pay particular attention
to the person's hips, thighs, buttocks, low back, and heels. Follow the protocol as
mandated by your agency.

81

It is sometimes difficult to determine the presence of a reddened area (a Stage 1
ulcer) in persons with darker skin tones. To recognize Stage 1 ulcers, look for:

■ Any change in the feel of the tissue in a high-risk area;
■ Any change in the appearance of the skin in high-risk areas, such as an
"orange-peel" look or a subtle purplish hue; and

■ Extremely dry crust-like areas that, upon closer examination, are found to
cover a tissue break.
Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No pressure ulcer
1 Any area of persistent skin redness -An area of skin that appears continually
reddened and does not disappear when pressure is relieved. There is no break in
the skin (Stage 1).
2 Partial loss of skin layers-A partial-thickness loss of skin that presents clini­
cally as an abrasion, blister, or shallow crater (Stage 2).
3 Deep craters in the skin-A full thickness of skin is lost, exposing the subcuta­
neous tissues. Presents as a deep crater with or without undermining of adjacent
tissue (Stage 3).
4 Breaks in skin exposing muscle or bone -A full thickness of skin and subcu­
taneous tissue is lost, exposing muscle or bone (Stage 4).
5 Not codeable -Necrotic eschar predominant.
6 Not codeable -Suspected deep tissue injury, depth unknown.

L2.

Prior Pressure Ulcer/Inj ury

Intent

To document a history of pressure ulcers, which is a risk factor for the development
of pressure ulcers in the future.

Process

Ask the person if he or she has ever had a pressure ulcer that is now healed. A
review of old records (including discharge summaries), clinical progress notes, flow
sheets, or care plans may also yield this information. If necessary, check with a fam­
ily member or care provider who has prior knowledge of the person's skin condi­
tion.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

L3.

Presence of Skin Ulcer/Injury Other Than Pressure Ulcer

Intent

To identify the presence of any skin ulcer that is not a pressure ulcer -for example,
a venous ulcer, arterial ulcer, mixed venous-arterial ulcer, or diabetic foot ulcer.

Definition

Skin ulcer-An open lesion caused by poor circulation in the lower limbs.

Process

Ask the person if he or she has a venous or arterial ulcer. Review the person's record
and consult with caregivers about the presence of this type of ulcer.

82

Section L Skin Condition

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

L4.

Major Skin Problems

Definitions

Maj or skin problems-This item includes lesions, second- or third-degree burns,
and healing surgical wounds.
Burn -Injury to tissues resulting from thermal, electrical, chemical, or radioactive
exposure. The effect of the injury may be local or systemic.

Process

Review the person's record and as necessary consult with person, family, or care­
giver about the presence of one of these major skin problems.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

LS.

Skin Tears or Cuts (Other Than Surgery)

Definition

Any traumatic break in the skin penetrating to the subcutaneous tissue. Does not
include surgical incisions.

Process

Review the person's record and as necessary consult with person, family, or care­
giver about the presence of a skin tear or cut.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

L6.

Other Skin Conditions or Changes in Skin Condition

Intent

To document the presence of skin problems other than ulcers, skin tears, or cuts,
and the major skin problems represented in the earlier items.

Definitions

Other skin conditions or changes in skin condition -For example, bruises,
rashes, itching, mottling, herpes zoster, intertrigo, or eczema.
Bruises-Black and blue areas (ecchy mosis).
Rashes-Include inflammation or eruption of the skin that may include change in
color, spotting, and blistering characterized at times by itching, burning, or pain.
Record rashes from any cause.
Mottling-A condition characterized by areas of skin discoloration.
Herpes zoster (shingles)-A type of viral infection that can lay latent for years.
Once active it presents with pain, itching, and blisters over affected veins.
lntertrigo -Reddish rash (skin inflammation) between the folds of skin.

Section L Skin Condition

83

Eczema-Major features include pruritus, atypical morphology and distribution,
and a tendency toward dry skin and itching. Flaking of skin may occur.
Vesiculobullous-Condition characterized by fluid-filled lesions (for example,
blisters) with vesicles being less than 5 to 10 mm and bullae being larger (for exam­
ple, pemphigus bullous pemphigoid).
Process

Review the person's record and as necessary consult with person, family, or care­
giver about the presence of any of the listed skin problems.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

L7.

Foot Problems

Definition

Includes bunions, hammertoes, overlapping toes, structural problems, infections,
deformed toenails, and ulcers.

Process

Ask the person and as necessary consult with family or caregiver about the pres­
ence of these types of problems. If the opportunity arises, you should be prepared
to examine the feet, including toenails, to see if the person has any of the indicated
foot problems.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No foot problems
1 Foot problems, no limitation in walking
2 Foot problems limit walking
3 Foot problems prevent walking
4 Foot problems, does not walk for other reasons

84

Section L Skin Condition

Section M

Medications
Medication use in the adult population is growing steadily. Of particular concern
are medications taken to prevent or treat chronic conditions, including hyper­
tension, diabetes, heart disease, arthritis, or selected psychiatric conditions; such
medications may be taken for years. In addition, having multiple health conditions
(multiple morbidity) often results in the use of multiple medications (polyphar­
macy) and a complicated drug regimen. Further, over-the-counter medications,
such as analgesics , non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and sleep medications,
are consumed by a large number of adults, resulting in increased risk of morbidity:
the higher the number of medications a person takes, the greater the risk of drug
interactions and adverse drug reactions. Long-term medication use, complicated
drug regimens, and polypharmacy also increase the risk of non-adherence.
The aim of this section is to help identify persons with potential risk factors for
medication-related health problems, as well as persons who may have difficulties
with medication management. These individuals may benefit from a more thorough
medication review by a physician or pharmacist, or from strategies to improve their
medication management skills. It may also help identify medications that might
be causing specific problems for the person, such as delirium or constipation. The
focus is on medications that the person has taken, not on medications prescribed.

M1 .
Intent

Definitions

Total Number of Medications
To facilitate medication management, by having a total count of the number of dif­
ferent medications (prescribed and over-the-counter medications) that the person
has taken in the last 7 days, excluding supplements.
Medications -Include all medications (prescription and over-the-counter medi­
cations) taken in the last 7 days; for example, pills, creams, ointments, eye drops,
artificial tears. This includes all the following:

■ Prescription medications -Includes medications that are now discontinued

but were taken in the last 7 days, as well as drugs prescribed PRN (as needed)
that were taken during this period. Be sure to include maintenance medica­
tions that are prescribed on a regular schedule, such as vitamin injections
given once a month, even if they were not administered in the last 7 days.

■ Over - the-counter medications -Includes all drugs obtained without a
prescription.

■ Compounded medications -Includes medications composed of two or
more compounds (for example, co-amoxiclav, in which clavulanic acid is
combined with amoxicillin). Any multicompounded or compounded drug is
counted as one medication.
Process

Section M Medications

Ask the person, family, or caregiver to identify all prescribed and over-the-coun­
ter medications taken over the last 7 days. This is best achieved by asking to see
all medication bottles, or to review the person's pill cases. If a current, updated

85

printout of medications is available, review. If a new medication was prescribed but
not taken in the last 7 days, do not count. You will need to count the total and note
a small list of specific medications to be listed under Item M8 below.
Count the total number of different medications the person took during the
assessment period.
Coding

Enter the exact number of different medications taken in the last 7 days. Enter 15 if
the person has taken 15 or more than 15 medications.

M2.

Total Number of Herbal and Nutritional Supplements

Intent

To determine the total number of different supplements taken regularly or on an
occasional basis in the last 7 days. Selected supplements may interact with other
medications taken by the person.

Definition

Supplements-A group of products used for their potential therapeutic properties
or to augment the nutritional content of diets. These include minerals, vitamins,
herbs, meal supplements, sports nutrition products, natural food supplements, and
other related products.

Process

Consult with the person, family, or caregiver to identify all such substances, and
then count the number of different supplements that the person has taken during
the last 7 days.

Coding

Enter the number of different supplements taken in the last 7 days. Note: Multivi­
tamins are counted as one supplement. Enter 15 if the person has taken 15 or more
than 15 different supplements.

Ml.

Disregard- this item not utilized in Missouri

M4.

Self-Reported Need for Medication Review

Intent

To determine whether the person has concerns about the medications he or she is
taking that should be discussed with a health professional. These concerns may sig­
nal medication safety issues (potential medication-related adverse events), medica­
tion inefficiency, medication management, or adherence problems.

Process

Ask: "Do you have concerns about your medications that you want to discuss with
a health professional?"

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes
8 Person could not (would not) respond

86

Section M Medications

MS.

Recently Changed Medications

Intent

To determine whether the person has been prescribed a new medication or had a
medication stopped or altered in the last 1 4 days by a prescribing health profes­
sional. A person with a recent medication change is at higher risk of medication­
related adverse events, including side effects, drug-drug interactions, drug-disease
interactions, non-adherence, or difficulty managing medications independently.

Process

Ask the person, or a family member or caregiver, if medications have been changed
in the last 14 days. As an alternative, review the medication bottles themselves.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

M6.

Cannabis Use

Intent

To determine whether the person used some form of cannabis for any purpose,
including medicinal, recreational, or ceremonial reasons. Included are botanical
products (for example, marijuana) and manufactured products (for example, nabix­
imols) that contain tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) or cannabidiol (CBD) in any form
(for example, smoked, edible, oils, topical). As such products are becoming legal in
different jurisdictions (for example, Canada and some U.S. states) their use can be
expected to increase, and their potential effects will need to be monitored.

Process

Ask person, or family and caregiver, if cannabis products were used in the last 9 0
days and, if used, what was the most recent use. Exclude illicit or illegal "synthetic
cannabis" (for example, bath salts) that are not produced by licensed pharmaceuti­
cal manufacturers.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 Not in last 90 days (or no cannabis use)
1 31-90 days ago
2 8-30 days ago

3 4-7 days ago
4 I n last 3 days

M7.

Medicinal Use of Cannabis

Intent

To determine whether cannabis was used for medicinal reasons. This would include
cannabis prescribed by a health professional to address a specific problem -for
example, pain, nausea, cancer side effects, glaucoma, epilepsy. However, in jurisdic­
tions where a prescription is not required, the person or family may purchase such
products over the counter. In that case, the person's self-reported reasons for use of
cannabis should be considered.

Process

Ask the person if cannabis is used for medicinal reasons. Alternatively, check
whether there is an existing prescription provided by an authorized health profes­
sional. If the person provides a non-specific answer (for example, "I take it to feel

Section M Medications

87

good"), ask whether he or she uses cannabis to treat a symptom that would other­
wise bother him or her if not treated (for example, anxiety, pain, nausea).
Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 None (or no cannabis use)
1 Sometimes used for medicinal purposes
2 Always used for medicinal purposes

M8.

Disregard-this item not utilized in Missouri

M9.

Adherent with Medications Prescribed by Physician or
Other Health Professional

Intent

To determine i f the person is taking/using medications as prescribed by a physician,
nurse practitioner, or physician assistant.

Definition

The person is actually taking medications as prescribed.

Process

You will have already solicited information from the person about his or her medi­
cations. Compare the person's responses with available medication and known
medication orders. Does the supply remaining seem appropriate considering when
the prescription was filled? Did the person and caregiver give accurate informa­
tion about medication administration? Remember, this item is not intended to
evaluate the appropriateness of the medication prescribed or the reason for the
non-consumption. For example, the person may say that he or she avoids taking
a prescribed medication because of perceived side effects (for example, noctur­
nal incontinence), and while the physician should be made aware of the issue, you
would still score this as not taking a prescribed medication.

Coding

0 Always adherent
1 Adherent 80% of time or more-Over the last 7 days, the person deviated from
prescribed medication regime 20% or less of the time.
2 Adherent less than 80% of the time, including failure to purchase prescribed
medications-Over the last 7 days, the person deviated from prescribed medi­
cation regime more than 20% of the time.
8 No medications prescribed-Person is not receiving any prescribed medi­
cation.

88

Section M Medications

Section N

Treatments and Procedures
N1.

Prevention

Intent

This item helps the assessor identify whether the person has unmet needs for health
counseling and preventive care.

Process

Ask the person if he or she received the following specific health measures.
Nla. Colonoscopy in LAST 5 YEARS-The entire colon (from anus to cecum)
was viewed by means of a fiber-optic colonoscopy.
Nlb. Dental exam in LAST YEAR-The person underwent a dental examina­
tion by a dentist, oral surgeon, or dental hygienist during the past year.
Nlc. Influenza vaccine in LAST YEAR-The person has received vaccination
for influenza prevention during the past year.
Nld. Pneumovax vaccine in LAST 5 YEARS or after age 65-The person
received the vaccine for prevention of pneumonia within the past 5 years or
after age 65.
Nle. COVID-19 vaccine in LAST YEAR (or as required).

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

N2.

Treatments and Programs Received or Scheduled
in the Last 3 D ays

Intent

To review prescribed treatments and determine the extent of the person's adher­
ence to the prescription. This item includes special treatments, therapies, and pro­
grams received or scheduled during the last 3 days, as well as adherence to the
required schedule. It includes services received in the home or on an outpatient
basis.

Definitions

Treatments
N2a. Chemotherapy-Includes any type of chemotherapy (anticancer drug)
given by any route.
N2b. Dialysis-Includes peritoneal or renal dialysis that occurs at home or at a
facility.
N2c. IV medication -Includes any drug or biological (for example, contrast
material) given by intravenous push or drip through a central or peripheral
port. Does not include a saline or heparin flush to keep a heparin lock pat­
ent, or IV fluids without medication.

Section N Treatments and Procedures

89

N2d. Oxygen therapy-Includes continuous or intermittent oxygen via mask,
cannula, or other means.
N2e. Radiation -Includes radiation therapy or having a radiation implant.
N2f. Suctioning-Includes oropharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, or tracheal aspira­
tion.
N2g. Tracheostomy care-Includes removal of cannula and cleansing of trache­
ostomy site and surrounding skin with appropriate solutions.
N2h. Transfusion -Includes transfusion of whole blood or any type of blood
products.
N2i. Ventilator or respirator-Mechanical device designed to provide adequate
ventilation in persons who are, or may become, unable to support their own
respiration. Includes any type of electrically or pneumatically powered
dosed-system mechanical ventilator support devices. Includes any person
who was in the process of being weaned off the ventilator or respirator in the
last 3 days.
N2j. Wound care-Includes the application of bandages (for example, dry gauze
dressings, dressings moistened with saline or other solutions, transparent
dressings, hydrogel dressings, or dressings with hydrocolloid or hydroactive
particles); wound irrigation; the application of ointments and topical medi­
cations to treat skin conditions (for example, cortisone, antifungal prepara­
tions, or chemotherapeutic agents); debridement (chemical or surgical) to
remove dirt or dead tissue from a wound; and suture removal.
Programs
N2k. Hospice/palliative care program for end of life-A formal program (at
the person's home or in a hospice setting) in which care is focused on the
relief of pain and other uncomfortable symptoms such as dyspnea. Persons
receiving palliative care generally have end-stage disease but may or may not
have a prognosis of 6 months or less to live (that is, the person may live for
many months or years).
Process

Ask the person, or a family member or caregiver, if he or she received specific treat­
ments or programs. If needed, review any available records on treatments received.

Coding

0

Not ordered AND did not occur

1 Ordered, not implemented
2 Implemented but not received in last 3 days
3

1-2 oflast 3 days

4 Daily in last 3 days

N3.

Formal Care-Number of Days Provided and Total Number
of Minutes of Care Provided in Last 7 Days (or Since Last
Assessment or Admission I f Less Than 7 Days)

Intent

To capture the number of minutes spent by formal (paid) caregiving agencies or
privately paid individuals in providing care or care management in the last 7 days
(or since last assessment or admission, if less than 7 days).

90

Section N Treatments and Procedures

Definitions

Care -Includes direct services and supports provided to the person (ADL and
IADL support, training, socialization), the management of care received (for exam­
ple, making medication schedules, planning for future needs), and the provision
of therapeutic care by any paid agency or service provider. Does not include care
that is provided without charge. Because the names used to describe home and
community-based services often differ by jurisdiction, the assessor should seek
clarification from agency leadership about how to code care that is not included in
this li st.
N3a. ADL aid/attendant care-Aides who traditionally provide "hands-on"
ADL support and simple monitoring. This includes hospice, home health, or
any other paid aid/attendant care.
N3b. Home nurse -Licensed or registered nurses who traditionally provide
assessment and complex or invasive interventions (skilled treatments), edu­
cation, and referral. Telemedicine nurse coverage is included if it is a paid
service.
N3c. Homemaking services- Services that traditionally include IADL support,
usually in the form of housekeeping services, shopping, and meal prepara­
tion.
N3d. Meals-Prepared meals that are delivered to the person for immediate or
later consumption (for example, meals-on-wheels).
N3e. Physical therapy-Therapy services that are provided or directly super­
vised by a qualified physical therapist. A qualified physical therapy assistant
may carry out a treatment plan developed by a physical therapist but may
not supervise others giving therapy.
N3f. Occupational therapy-Therapy services that are provided or directly
supervised by a qualified occupational therapist. A qualified occupational
therapy assistant may carry out a treatment plan developed by an occupa­
tional therapist but may not supervise others (aides or volunteers) giving
therapy.
N3g. Speech-language pathology or audiology services-Services provided by
a qualified speech-language pathologist. Services may involve assessment of
swallowing abili ty or communication and hearing ability, as well as provid­
ing swallowing therapy, speech therapy, communication therapy, providing
hearing appliances, and education.
N3h. Psychosocial therapy-Therapy given by a licensed mental health profes­
sional, such as a psychiatrist, psychologist, psychiatric nurse, or psychiatric
social worker.
N3i. Cardiac rehabilitation [Missouri Item] -a medically supervised program
of exercise and education designed to improve cardiovascular health in per­
sons that have experienced a heart attack, heart failure, or heart procedure/
surgery.
N3j. Adult day care -A program in the community that provides structured
therapeutic health services and supervised activities for persons with physi­
cal, mental, or intellectual disabilities. May include transportation to and
from the facility.

Process

Ask the person or caregivers about the persons and agencies involved with care, the
nature of the relationship, and the amount of time spent in providing care or care
management. If possible, consult logbooks that the person may have in the home,
and review agency documentation if available.

Section N Treatments and Procedures

91

Coding

Code the number of days in the first column (maximum = 7) and the number of
minutes in the second column, one digit per box. Based on the information avail­
able to you, select the best category for the type of support provided. Do not code
twice for the same service. If the person did not get a particular form of care, enter
"O" in the appropriate box(es).

Example of How to Code Formal Care
In the last 7 days, the person received 2 hours of home health aide service on 3 days to
assist with bathing; visiting nurse service once for l hour and 15 minutes lo review medi­
cations with the client and family and do a physical assessment; and a homemaker once
for 3½ hours for cleaning. 1n addition, lhe person had a volunteer from lhe "visiting vol­
unteer" agency for l hour on each of 3 days, as well as a privately paid speech therapist on
2 days, for 4½ hours total.
Code as foUows:

N3a. Home health aide (PersonaJ Care Attendant)

3

3

6

0

N3b. Home nurse

1

0

7

5

N3c. Homemaking services

1

2

N3d. Meals

0

0

0

()

N3e. Physical therapy

0

0

0

0

N3f. Occupational therapy

0

0

0

0

N3g. Speech-language pathology and audiology services

2

2

7

0

N3h. Psychosocial therapy

0

0

0

0

N3i. Cardiac rehabilitation

0

0

0

0

N3j. Adult day health care

0

0

0

0

0

N4.

Long-Term Care Facility/Hospital Stay in the Last Year
(or Since Last Assessment If Less Than 1 Year Ago)

Intent

To document the amount of time since the person's most recent stay as a measure
of clinical instability and care trajectory.

Process

Ask the person. Review any available payment or similar record. If available, dis­
charge summaries are generally the most efficient means to gather this information.
If not documented elsewhere, consult with the person or family.

Coding

Code for the most recent instance in the last 365 days. Calculate the number of
days between the most recent stay in the last 365 days and the assessment reference
date. Code "O" if the person has not been hospitalized in the last 365 days.
0 No stay within 365 days
1 181-365 days ago

92

Section N Treatments and Procedures

2 91-180 days ago

3 31-90 days ago
4 15-30 days ago
5 8-14 days ago
6 In last 7 days

7 Now in facility
N4a. Time Since Last Hospital Stay
N4b. Time Since Last Long-Term Care Facility/Nursing Home Stay
NS.

Hospital Use, Emergency Room Use, in Last 90 Days (or
Since Last Assessment If Less Than 90 Days Ago)

NSa.

Inpatient acute hospital with overnight stay

Intent

To record how many times the person was admitted to the hospital with an over­
night stay in the last 90 days (or since the last assessment, if the person was assessed
less than 9 0 days ago).

Definition

The person was formally admitted as an inpatient (by physician's order) and stayed
over 1 or more nights. It does not include admissions for day surgery, outpatient
services, etc.

Process

Review prior hospitalizations with the person, family, and caregivers. If available,
review the clinical record. Sometimes transmittal or billing records from recent
hospital admissions are available.

Coding

Enter the number of hospital admissions in the box. Enter "O" in both boxes if no
hospital admissions occurred in the last 90 days. If the code is a single digit, use a
leading zero to fill in the first box.

NSb.

Emergency room visit (not counting overnight stay)

Intent

To record if during the last 9 0 days (or since the last assessment, if the person was
assessed less than 90 days ago) the person visited a hospital emergency room (ER)
for treatment or evaluation, not including any ER visits that were accompanied by
an overnight hospital stay.

Process

Ask the person, family, and caregivers; also review transmittal records if available.

Coding

Enter the number of ER visits in the last 90 days (or since last assessment). Enter "O"
in both boxes if no ER visits occurred. Do not include instances in which the person
was admitted to the hospital for an overnight stay after being seen in the ER. If the
code is a single digit, use a leading zero to fill in the first box.

Section N Treatments and Procedures

93

N6.

Visits by Physician, Physician Assistant, Nurse Practitioner

Intent

To record the number of days during the last 90-day period a physician, physician
assistant, or nurse practitioner examined the person (or since admission if less than
9 0 days ago). Examination can occur in the person's home, in the practitioner's
office, or via telehealth link. In some cases, the frequency of such visits is indica­
tive of clinical complexity. If multiple practitioners are present on a single visit (for
example, a physician and a nurse practitioner), code only the physician.

Definitions

Practitioner -This item includes a broad spectrum of medical providers and spe­
cialists (for example, general practitioners and specialists such as geriatricians),
who are either primary physicians or consultants. This item also includes a space to
record a visit by an authorized physician assistant or nurse practitioner. An autho­
rized physician assistant is a health care professional licensed to practice medicine
with physician supervision. An example of an authorized practitioner is a nurse
practitioner.
Exam-May be a partial or full exam at the person's home, or in the practitioner's
office, or via a telehealth link. This does not include exams conducted in an emer­
gency room. If the person was examined by a physician during an unscheduled
emergency room visit, record the number of times this happened in the last 9 0 days
in Item NSb, "Emergency room visit'.

Coding

Total the number of visits for each of the three practitioner categories and record
those numbers in the spaces provided. If no visits were made, enter "O" in both
boxes. If the code is a single digit, use a leading zero to fill in the first box.

N7.

Self-Reported Health Concerns

Intent

To identify whether unmet health needs are present and to subsequently facilitate a
physician referral.

Process

Ask the question as phrased: "Do you have health concerns that should be dis­
cussed with a physician?"

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes
8 Person could not (would not) respond

N8.

Monitoring of Mental Condition [Missouri Item]

Intent

To identify the amount and type of monitoring provided to a person with a diag­
nosed mental health condition.

Process

Determine if the person is currently receiving monitoring by a licensed mental
health professional for a mental health condition. Determine the frequency of the
monitoring and stability of the condition. If the person is receiving monitoring,
determine who is completing the monitoring, how often the monitoring takes
place, and the current stability of the person's mental condition.

94

Section N Treatments and Procedures

Definitions

No Routine Monitoring-Person receives no monitoring or is monitored less
than monthly for a mental health condition.
Minimal monitoring -Person receives monitoring at least monthly for a stable
mental health condition.
Moderate monitoring-Person receives monitoring at least monthly for an unsta­
ble mental health condition.
Maximum monitoring-Person receives intensive monitoring for an unstable
mental health condition.

Coding

0 No Routine Monitoring
1 Minimal monitoring
2 Moderate monitoring
3

Maximum monitoring

Section N Treatments and Procedures

95

Section O

Responsibility
01.

Legal Guardian

Intent

To determine if the person has a court-appointed representative.

Definition

Legal guardian-A person legally responsible for the person being assessed.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 No

1 Yes

Section o Responsibility

97

Section P

Social Supports
P1.

Informal Helpers

Intent

To record the number of family and friends who provided informal (unpaid) sup­
port to the person in the last 3 days, or who usually provide help but did not in the
last 3 days. This is different from a formal (paid) relationship that the person may
have with a home care agency.

Process

Ask the person (with family or caregiver help, if needed) to identify the number of
persons who provide support to the person. For example, shape the questions with
specific statements: "Who helps you shop?" "Who helps with cleaning around the
house?" "Who helps you with your meals, bathing, dressing, etc.?" "Who helps you
pay your bills?" "Who drives you when you need a ride?" If the person is not able to
understand or respond, or gives responses that are unclear, evasive, or untrue (for
example, refers to her husband when you know the husband is deceased), review
the person's answers with caregiver.
It is important to understand that some helpers may not be described as such by
the person. They do things consistent with "expected" social relationships -it is
what the person expects a son or wife to "do:' Thus, it is useful to focus the person's
attention on who provides needed assistance or support, rather than using the label
"caregiver:'
In some jurisdictions, informal helpers may also be paid for part of their overall
caregiving activities. In such situations, record paid activity under Item N3 and
unpaid activity here.

Coding

Code number of helpers from "O" to "9" -the latter standing for nine or more, for
each type of informal helper.
Pia. Child or child-in-law
Plb. Spouse/partner
Plc. Parent
Pld. Sibling
Ple. Other relative or friend

P2.

Primary Helper

Intent

To identify the primary person (relative or friend) providing informal (nonpaid)
support to the person.

Process

Ask the person (with family or caregiver help, if needed) to identify the person from
among those identified under Item Pl above who provides the most care and could
be relied upon should more help be required. If two or more persons are identified,
the assessor will have to make a judgment as to which individual is the primary
helper.

Section P Social Supports

99

Again, as under Item Pl above, recognize that some persons may not use the term
"helper" to describe those who in fact are providing help. The person or the helper
may see what they do as natural in their role as a spouse or a child.
Coding

Code the number that corresponds to the primary helper.
1 Child or ch ild-in-law
2 Spouse/partner
3 Parent

4 Sibling
5 Other relative or friend

8 No primary helper

Pl.

Travel Time Between Person and Primary Informal Helper

Intent

To identify the time required for the primary informal helper to reach the person.
The shorter the time the more immediate the potential response in both daily care
and in emergency situations.

Process

Ask the person (with family or caregiver help, if needed) to indicate the average
time usually required for the primary informal helper to travel from his or her home
to the home of the person. This could be based on walking, taking public transpor­
tation, on traveling in the helper's personal mode of transport (a bike, motorcycle,
or car). Note: Use code "O" if the helper lives in the same building/residence.

Coding

Code for the appropriate response.
0 Live together -The helper and the person live in the same residence or
building.
1 1-14 minutes
2 15-29 minutes
3 30-59 minutes
4 60+ minutes
8 No primary helper

P4.

Primary Informal Helper Status

Intent

To assess the reserves and strengths relative to the person identified in Item P2 as
the primary informal caregiver helper (support person).

Process

Ask the primary informal caregiver and person separately about the issues addressed
in these items. If necessary, the formal home care workers may also be able to add
useful information. These are sensitive issues and should be handled with tact. Lis­
ten carefully to what is being said.

100

Section P Social Supports

Coding

P4a. Primary helper feels sense of self-worth in helping person -Other simi­
lar words include "self-respect;' "pleasure;' "considerable satisfaction;' "self­
esteem:'
0 No
1 Yes
P4b. Primary helper finds it difficult to manage competing demands and
the areas in which this occurs -The demands are in relation to any of the
following.
0 No
1 Yes
P4ba. Work, job
P4bb. Family, children
P4bc. Attend school
P4bd. Make enough money to live on
P4c. Primary helper expresses feelings of distress and, if so, whether future
help of person is in jeopardy
0 Not stressed
1 Stressed but no change in care expected
2 Stressed -crisis point reached, cut back in care expected-For example,
visit less often, cut back in length of visit, cut back on certain tasks (e.g., house­
work), cut back to bare minimum.
3 Stressed -crisis point reached, will stop providing care
P4d. Primary helper feels he/she gets inadequate support from formal
care services-Burden could be lessened were formal care services to be
increased, but at the current time this does not seem possible.
0 No
1 Yes

PS.

Hours of Informal Care and Active Monitoring During Last 3
Days

Intent

To capture the number of hours that informal helpers spent assisting the person in
instrumental and personal activities of daily living, including active monitoring by
looking in on the person, over the last 3 days.

Definitions

Informal helpers -Unpaid care by any person, including family, friends, neigh­
bors, and others who provide assistance to the person (see Item Pl).
Instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs)-These include meal preparation,
housework, managing finances, etc.

Section P Social Supports

1 01

Personal activities of daily living (ADLs) -These include mobility in bed, dress­
ing, toilet use, etc.
Active monitoring -Presence for express purpose of performing a safety check as
the person walks, performs IADLs, or performs ADLs. Does not include visiting or
hanging out for purely social purposes.
Process

Consult with the person about hours of care. Confirm information with informal
helpers.

Coding

Record the total amount of unpaid assistance the person received over the last 3
days. For example, if family members, friends, and neighbors provided 120 minutes
(2 hours) each day, the total number of hours for help received during the last 3
days is 6. If more than one individual provided help, at the same time or at different
times, add up the hours for each helper-for example, if two neighbors spent an
hour together doing housecleaning for the person, this would count as 2 hours.
Round minutes to the nearest hour. For example, 12 hours and 45 minutes should
be coded as 13 hours.
If the person did not receive any informal care during the last 3 days, enter "O"
in all three boxes. If the number of hours is single-digit or double-digit, use leading
zero(s) to fill in the first box(es).

102

Section P Social Supports

Section Q

Environmental Assessment
Q 1.

Home Environment

Intent

To determine if the home environment is hazardous or uninhabitable.

Definitions

Qla. Home in disrepair- For example, hazardous clutter, inadequate lighting,

holes in floor, extremely dirty, infestation of rats or bugs.

Qlb. Inadequate heating or cooling- For example, too hot in summer or too

cold in winter.

Q le. Lack of personal safety- For example, fear of violence, a safety problem in

going to the mailbox or visiting neighbors, or heavy traffic in the street. The
person is (or feels) at risk for violence within or immediately outside of his or
her home. This can include a real or perceived risk of someone breaking into
the home, or of being attacked while getting mail or when leaving or return­
ing home.

Qld. Limited access to home or rooms in home-This item includes physical

characteristics of the building that limit access -for example, the person
has difficulty entering or leaving home, is unable to climb stairs to the only
bathroom, or lives on the second floor and must enter or leave on unstable
outside stairs, or the person lives in a multistory building in which the eleva­
tor is often broken, or in which stairs do not have the needed railings, or has
difficulty maneuvering within rooms.

Process

Ask the person (or family member) for permission to walk through the home. Look
for evidence of the problem areas noted in this section. Talk to the person (and fam­
ily member i f necessary) about any areas that you cannot assess yourself through
visual inspection.

Coding

Code for the most appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

Q2.

Finances

Intent

To determine if limited funds prevented the person from receiving essential medi­
cal and environmental support.

Definition

Limited funds -Because of limited funds during the last 30 days, the person made

trade-offs among purchasing any of the following: adequate food, shelter, cloth­
ing; prescribed medications; sufficient home heat or cooling; necessary health care.
Does not include poor choices made by the person due to addiction or other mental
health problems that result in overexpenditures of available income.

Section Q Environmental Assessment

1 03

Process

Coding

Ask the person, or caregiver, if prescribed medications, sufficient home heat, nec­
essary medical care, or adequate food were not obtained due to insufficient funds.
Asking financial questions can be a sensitive area. Questioning must be sensitive
and respectful.
Code for the most appropriate response.
0 No
1 Yes

104

Section Q Environmental Assessment

Section R

Overa 1 1 Status
R1 .

Overall Self-Sufficiency Has Changed Significantly
as Compared to Status of 90 Days Ago (or Since Last
Assessment If Less Than 90 Days Ago)

Intent

To monitor the person's overall self-sufficiency over time. If this is the person's first
assessment, include changes during the period prior to admission to the agency.

Definition

Overall self-sufficiency-The person's belief/perception that he or she can take
care of him- or herself and be content, without dependence on others. Includes
self-care performance, continence patterns, access to needed transportation, etc.

Process

Discuss with the person. If available, review clinical records, transmittal records
(if new admission or readmission), previous assessments (if this is a reassessment),
and any care plan notes i f available. If necessary, discuss with a family member or
caregiver.

Coding

Code for the most appropriate response.
0 Improved
1 No change
2 Deteriorate d

Examples o f How to Code for Changes in Self-Sufficiency
Mrs. T has had Alzheimer's disease for several years. In the last 4 months, her overall con­
dition has generally improved. Although her cognitive function has remained unchanged,
her mood is better. She seems happier and less agitated, sleeps more soundJy at night, and
is more soc ially involved with her husband and neighbors.
Code: RI = "O" = "Improved".

Mr. D also has a several-year history of Alzheimer's disease. Although for the last year he
was quite dependent on others in many areas, he was able to put on his own clothes, walk,
and eaL wilh supervision until recently. In the lasl 90 days, he can no longer walk wiLhout
someone holding his arm. Additionally, he fell 2 weeks ago and has been unable to learn
how to use a wall<er. He sits until someone gets lhe walker and accompanies him as he
leaves his apartment. He is fearful of falling again.
Code: Rl = "2" = "Deteriorated".

Section R Overall Status

105

Section S

Backu p Plan
S1.

Backup Plan [Missouri Item]

Process

Discuss with the person what their plans would be if services/supports could not be
provided due to events such as a natural disaster, weather, or sickness.

Coding

Enter backup plan information in text box. Plans should include at a minimum the
contact(s) first and last name, phone number, relationship to the participant, and
assistance they would be able to provide if needed.

Section s Backup Plan

1 07

Section T

Assessment Information
T1.

Signature of Person Coordinating /Completing the
Assessment

Intent

The Assessment Coordinator (who will usually be the sole assessor in the home care
environment) signs and certifies that the assessment is complete.

Coding

The Assessment Coordinator signs his or her name on line 1 and then puts the date
that he or she signed the assessment as complete in box 2. This date can differ from
the Assessment Reference Date (see Item A9). If the month or day is a single digit,
enter a "O" in the first box.
T ia. Signature
T Ib. Date assessment signed as complete -For example, December 11, 2022.

2
Year

2

�

Month

�

Day

T2.

Primary Mode of Assessment (Code for Mode Used for the
Majority of Assessment Items)

Intent

To record the primary mode of interaction used to complete the assessment.

Definition

Virtual conference with video refers to communication between the assessor and
the person where both parties, although not in the same location and meeting in
person, have the potential to see each other and interact. This includes instances
where the subject may be blind and thus lacks the capacity to see. Virtual confer­
ence audio only refers to communication where both parties can hear but cannot
see one another. The type of equipment used to accomplish virtual conferences is
not considered, only the effect: both parties must be able to view each other.

Process

To increase the accuracy of assessment information, interRAI has long recom­
mended that assessments be conducted face-to-face. This enables the assessor
to observe the person in his/her current living situation, and enhances whatever
information can be learned from caregivers and/or health care records. However,
in exceptional circumstances, such as a pandemic or extreme weather, or when the
person lives in a remote location that cannot be visited timely by the assessor, it may
be necessary to utilize video conferencing or telephone communication to com­
plete the assessment, or to deploy all three modes.

Section T Assessment Information

109

Coding

Select the coding option that represents the mode most often used. If several dif­
ferent modes were employed, select the option that describes the mode used to
complete the majority of the assessment information.
1 In person
2 Virtual conference with video
3 Virtual conference audio only

T3.

Sources of Information Used to Complete the Assessment
Code only ONE PRIMARY source and ALL APPLICABLE SECONDARY sources.

Intent

To identify all information sources used to inform the assessment.

Definition

Primary refers to the information source most relied on throughout the assessment
process. Secondary refers to any other source used by the assessor. Information
sources includes both written and oral communication. For example, during the
course of an assessment, the assessor may converse with the person and his/her
spouse, have a telephone call with the person's paid support worker, and review
hospital discharge notes.
T3a. Person
T3b. Spouse/partner
T3c. Parent/guardian
T3d. Child or chil d -in-law
T3e. Other relative
T3f. Friend or neighbor
T3g. Physician/physician assistant/nurse practitioner
T3h. Other health or social service provider

Coding

Enter the appropriate code after each possible source of information. Do not leave
any item blank.
0 Not applicable
1 Primary
2 Secondary

110

Section T Assessment Information

List of Abbreviations
AC

Acute Care

AOL

Activities of Daily Living

AL

Assisted Living

CAPs

Clinical Assessment Protocols

CF

Mental Health for Correctional Facilities

CMH

Community Mental Health

CVA

cerebrovascular accident

GI

gastrointestinal

GU

genitourinary

HC

Home Care

IAOL

Instrumental Activities of Daily Living

ICO-CM

International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification

ID

Intellectual Disability

LTCF

Long-Term Care Facilities

MOS

Minimum Data Set

MH

Mental Health

PC

Palliative Care

QOL

Self-Report Quality of Life

RAI

Resident Assessment Instrument

RUGS

Resource Utilization Groups

List of Abbreviations

111

