Section 23 Prevention CAP Problem It is preferable to prevent illnesses and disabilities rather than be required to address them once they have occurred. Therefore, the Prevention CAP is designed to alert the health care worker to the need to determine if the person has unmet preven.tive health requirements (for example, blood pressure screening, immunizations, mammograms) and to meet as many of them as possible in all settings of care. Although preventive health directives often may best be instituted before age 65, there is increasing evidence that many can be introduced profitably even in the later years of life. Some recommendations are designed specifically for use in that time period. It has been suggested that the most reasonable approach to screening most adults, and especially older adults, would be to incorporate such activities into the routine physician visit. In general, preventive health measures include immunizations and screening for unrecognized health problems. While immunizations are designed to prevent ill.ness, screening is designed to detect unrecognized illness at an early and treatable stage. The goal of both is to reduce morbidity and mortality. Although the advan.tage of any preventive health intervention is likely to decline with advancing age if measured in years of morbidity saved, prevention is still of great value for most older persons. It must be appreciated that the average 65-year-old currently has a life expectancy approaching 20 years. Furthermore, although many disorders of older adults are chronic and not curable, early detection and treatment of problems that interfere with functioning may result in functional deficits being postponed or even prevented altogether. Overall Goal of Care е .Ensure that persons who have not received preventive measures are identified and appropriate action i!> taken. Prevention CAP Trigger TRIGGERED BECAUSE PREVENTIVE STRATEGY WAS NOT PURSUED, DESPITE A RECENT PHYSICIAN VISIT This group includes persons who have recently seen a physician and have not fol.lowed one or more of the following prevention strategies: . Blood pressure measured in the last year . Colonoscopy test in the last 5 years . Dental exam in the last year . Eye exam in the last year . Hearing exam in the last 2 years . Influenza vaccine in the last year еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT . Mammogram in the last 2 years (for women only) . Pneumovax vaccine in the last 5 years This triggered group includes about 40% of persons receiving home care and 80% of persons in long-term care facilities. TRIGGERED BECAUSE PREVENTIVE STRATEGY WAS NOT PURSUED AND THERE HAS BEEN NO RECENT PHYSICIAN VISIT This group includes persons who have not recently seen a physician and have not followed one or more of the following prevention strategies: . Blood pressure measured in the last year . Colonoscopy test in the last 5 years . Dental exam in the last year . Eye exam in the last year . Hearing exam in the last 2 years . Influenza vaccine in the last year . Mammogram in the last 2 years (for women only) . Pneumovax vaccine in the last 5 years This triggered group includes 35% of persons receiving home care and almost no persons living in long-term care facilities. NOT TRIGGERED This group includes all other persons. The "Not Triggered" group includes about 20% of persons in long-term care facilities and 25% of persons receiving home care. Prevention CAP Guidelines The Prevention CAP concept of prevention encompasses a wide variety of tests, procedures, and clinical interventions. This CAP concentrates on some of the more traditional preventive health measures. Many other CAPs relate to prevention of a variety of other problems. A negative response to any item noted in this CAP raises the possibility of poor preventive health care and further suggests the need to determine whether the per.son has access to high-quality comprehensive medical care. Persons who have not had specific preventive health tests likely should be recommended for consider.ation of those tests. The potential benefit and harm derived from each screening procedure and possible intervention must be considered in light of the age and frailty of the person. The vaccines and screening procedures commonly recommended in the care of adults, and especially older adults, are noted in the following sections. In general, this CAP does not address preventive health measures that require the collection of laboratory data although, unquestionably, the comprehensive management of all older persons requires routinely obtaining some laboratory data both for screening and for establishing a "baseline" for future comparisons. There are considerable data about, but not absolute agreement on, which tests are indicated at what age. Preventive health measures likely to be included in other CAPs are not considered here (for example, items that are pertinent to the prevention of pressure ulcers or the problems related to alcohol consumption). lt is important to note that recommendations for "routine" screening vary among countries. This CAP is based on commonly adopted strategies in many countries. It is important to understand which of these strategies have been adopted in your country, as it may not be possible to implement recommendations without financial support from a government or other relevant funding agency. The country-specific guidelines cited in this CAP are intended to illustrate guidelines that may be found in other countries. Vaccinations. Older adults especially are susceptible to a number of infectious dis.eases, in particular those of the lower respiratory tract. Influenza and pneumonia remain the fifth leading cause of death in this age group. The merits of screening older adults to determine if they have received appropriate vaccines are clear. If an older person is admitted to the hospital in the United States for community acquired pneumonia, screening for a history of having received influenza and pneumonia vaccine is the standard of care as determined by Medicare. The Public Health Agency of Canada recommends influenza immunization yearly as well as timely pneumococcal vaccinations for those age 65 and over. If the person has not received these vaccines within the designated time period, they should be offered to the person while in the acute-care setting. Influenza. Influenza epidemics usually occur in the late fall and winter season, and all older persons should be vaccinated each year before the influenza season except under unusual circumstances (for example, allergy to the vaccine). Because the virus changes on an annual basis, vaccination in one year is not likely to provide significant protection in subsequent years. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States rec.ommends this immunization program for all persons 50 years of age and over as well as certain other groups unless there is a specific contraindication. Recently the vaccine has been recommended for many more individuals in other age groups. Similar recommendations are made by the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) (www.!hc-sc.gc.ca). Influenza vaccination is one of the most cost-effective medical interventions available. Of note, older adults have higher hospitalization and death rates from influenza than any other segment of the popu.lation and account for 80 to 90% of all influenza-related deaths. Although there is considerable year-to-year variation, vaccines have been shown to be on average 70% effective in preventing influenza, with the remaining 30% often having milder ill.ness than unvaccinated persons. Pneumococcal disease and otherinfectious diseases. An immunization program for pneumococcal disease is recommended for almost all older persons. However, it is not given annually. Unless there is a specific contraindication, tetanus immuni.zation every 10 years is recommended for all adult age groups by agencies like the CDC and NACI. Details of immunization programs for other infections, such as hepatitis, varicella, and meningococcal disease, are available on the CDC Web site (www.cdc.gov) or Canadian Immunization Guide (www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ cig-gci/index-eng.php ). Screening. Traditional screening measures are valuable in circumstances where the disease in question has a high incidence rate and a treatment and/or therapy exists that can cure it or favorably modify its progression if found early. Also, there must be a reasonable likelihood that the person will live and function well for a period of time. Hypertension. Hypertension is defined as a blood pressure of 140/90, with a sys.tolic pressure of 120 to139 and a diastolic pressure of 80 to 89 viewed as "pre.hypertensive:' Hypertension is a very significant risk factor for both coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular disease. According to the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evalua.tion and Treatment of High Blood Pressure of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), as many as 90% of persons who are normotensive (having normal blood pressure) at age 55 will develop hypertension over the course of their lives. There is now compelling evidence that lowering blood pressure (including isolated sys.tolic hypertension) is advantageous well into the later years. Several major studies have demonstrated good outcomes when hypertension was controlled, including a reduced incidence of stroke, congestive heart failure, and mortality. Therefore, screening at regular intervals is highly recommended. The level to which the blood pressure should be lowered varies to some degree according to the age of the person and his or her medical conditions. Recommendations for frequency of screening vary by organization. The Institute of Medicine in the United States suggests that persons age 50 and older without known cardiovascular disease and with a history of normal blood pressure read.ings should have their blood pressure checked once every 2 years if there are no known risk factors (see also the Canadian Hypertension 2007 Educational Program: www.hypertension.ca/bpc/wp-content/uploads/2008/02/2008publicrecommenda tions.pdf). Most professional organizations would recommend that the blood pres.sure be measured routinely when adults seek care for most conditions. The proper means of taking the blood pressure can be found on the NIH Web site (www.nih .gov). Breast cancer. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women (except for skin cancers). Approximately one in nine women will develop breast cancer. Several fac.tors are associated with a higher risk, such as a mother or sister having breast can.cer, as well as the presence of certain genetic markers. There is evidence that breast cancer screening by means of mammography reduces mortality from breast cancer for women over 50 years of age. Of note, newer radiologic and imaging procedures may well be far more effective, but good data are not readily available at this time. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening mammography, with or without a clinical breast examination, every 1 to 2 years for women age 40 or older. According to the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examina.tion (CTPHE), women age 50 to 69 should receive screening with clinical breast examination (CBE) and mammography annually. In the United Kingdom, the NHS Breast Screening Programme suggests screening every 3 years for this age group, and it also offers screening to women over 70 at their request. For women with a strong family history of breast cancer, the age to begin screen.ing and the frequency to do so may be different. The value of the breast self-exami.nation is not clear, and therefore many organizations make no specific recommen.dation. Data to support formal recommendations about mammography for those above about age 75 to 80 are hard to come by. Screening recommendations must be made in light of the woman's other medical conditions, insofar as they have an impact on her life expectancy. In general, if a woman has a life expectancy of greater than about 6 years, a case can be made to recommend mammography and perhaps newer screening procedures. Many groups recommend that a primary care pro.vider perform breast examinations routinely on their female patients, although data to support the efficacy of this recommendation as a screening measure are lacking. Colorectal cancer. The lifetime probability that a person will develop colorectal cancer is reported to be about 6 per 100 individuals. There are certain medical conditions that increase the risk. Race-specific rates suggest there are significant genetic factors that increase the incidence of this type of tumor, and certain races appear to have a higher risk of developing colon cancer at a younger age than oth.ers. Furthermore, the prevalence of colon cancer varies strikingly around the world, likely in part as a result of different dietary habits and perhaps other environmental factors. In general, the incidence increases with age. In Canada, colorectal can.cer is the second most diagnosed cancer in women and third most in males (www .cancercare.on.ca). Traditional screening tests have included the digital rectal exam and the fecal occult blood test. Regrettably, the evidence that they are valuable screening tools is limited at best. Nonetheless, because of the ease with which they can be carried out, they may be of some value in situations where screening by means of colonoscopy is not available. There are a large number of false positive and false negative tests with the fecal occult blood test. Flexible colonoscopy has become the standard in prevention. In no small part this is because most malignancies of the colon arise from other growths, usually adenomas (benign tumors that have a glandular ori.gin), which can be found and removed by means of this procedure. Other radiologic screening tools are being developed. Of course, should a growth be discovered, likely a colonoscopy will be necessary for biopsy and/or removal. The frequency that a colonoscopy should be performed is under continual review and depends in part on whether or not a polyp (abnormal growth of tissue [tumor] projecting from a mucous membrane) is found on an initial study. Also, some premalignant growths are not easily seen unless the bowel is well cleaned out. It is known that the risks of colonoscopy are greater in the very elderly, and that although the prevalence of colonic neoplasia is higher among older persons, the mean extension in life expec.tancy is lower among adults age 80 and older compared with those age 50 to 54. Gynecological (cervical/uterus) cancer. Although some groups have recom.mended a Pap smear every 1 to 3 years for older women, the upper age limit for screening remains a point of debate. If a woman has been screened regularly and if she does not have a high number of sex partners, the value of continuing screening beyond age 65 appears to be small, assuming she is asymptomatic and has no men.strual bleeding. Prostate cancer. Although some groups continue to recommend yearly rectal examinations, many leading agencies do not. Screening by means of a PSA test is widely carried out in many places; however, its value as a screening tool remains controversial, in part because of the large number of false positive and false nega.tive tests. However, it has great value in follow-up of men who have been diagnosed with cancer of the prostate. Sensory impairments. Many preventive strategies involving screening for early hearing loss are addressed in the Communication CAP. It is clear that the provision of hearing aids as well as other assistive devices may produce dramatic improve.ment in function. With respect to vision, many groups recommend an annual oph.thalmologic evaluation in older persons. Osteoporosis. Approximately 20 to 25 million Americans are at increased risk for fractures because of low bone density. More than one million fractures in the United States each year can be attributed to this condition. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, about one out of four women and one out of eight men over age 50 have osteoporosis. Similar data are available for other nations, espe.cially those with large numbers of Caucasian women and those in Northern Europe, where decreased exposure to sunlight over long periods of the year results in the limited bio-availability of vitamin D. This issue is addressed in the Falls and Nutri.tion CAPs. At this time, screening by means of bone mineral density (BMD) x-rays (test that measures the density of minerals such as calcium to estimate the strength of bones) is recommended for all women age 65 and older by the National Osteoporo.sis Foundation (www.nof.org). Because such studies measure bone density and not bone structure itself, these recommendations may be modified in the near future when other screening mechanisms become widely available. Screening recommen.dations for men are under consideration. Skin testing for tuberculosis. In the United States, skin testing for tuberculosis is now a two-step process. If the initial PPD (Purified Protein Derivative TB Skin Test or Mantoux) is negative, a repeat study is recommended usually in about 2 weeks. Screening blood tests. There are a large number of screening blood tests that can be and often are used in different age groups. The merits of each test individually are difficult to ascertain. This should not be construed to mean that there is no merit in doing any number of blood tests, for example the measurement of hemoglobin, B12 levels, and thyroid function, on a regular basis. lt is unclear how frequently they should be ordered. Screening for the various lipid abnormalities, especially in men beginning at age 40 and in women perhaps at a somewhat older age, is recom.mended by many professional organizations. Smoking. Smoking is hazardous at any age both to those who smoke and those in the environment of the smoker. ln addition, there is evidence that ceasing to smoke even a few weeks prior to an elective surgical procedure will decrease the risk of some of the complications associated with that procedure. The Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) in the United States requires all persons admitted with a diagnosis of pneumonia to an acute-care facility to be screened for smoking and to be given smoking cessation material if the person does smoke. Miscellaneous. The value of screening for certain tumors, specifically ovarian cancer (for example, by means of serum tumor markers, ultrasound), lung cancer (chest x-ray, sputum cytology), and cardiac disease (by means of CT scanning) is not clear at this time. Recently there has been a recommendation to screen men age 65 and above for presence of abdominal aortic aneurysm. If normal, no further screening is recommended at this time. Lastly, screening to determine if there is a need to counsel a person about the value of an exercise program targeted to his or her clinical condition is strongly recom.mended by most. Additional Resources Fact sheets on immunization developed by Victoria, Australia, Department of Human Services: www.health.vic.gov.au/immunisation/factsheets Health Canada Web site: www.hc-sc.gc.ca NHS Breast Screening fact sheet: www.cancerscreening.nhs.uk/breastscreen/ publications/ over70. pdf Osteoporosis Canada Web site: www.osteoporosis.ca U.S. Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ guidelines/hypertension/ jnc7full.pdf Authors Knight Steel, MD John P. Hirdes, PhD Section 24 Appropriate Medications CAP Problem Changes associated with aging affect an individual's capacity to benefit from and tolerate medications (drugs), and inappropriate use of medications can prove harmful to the person. Age-associated changes occur in the absorption, distribu.tion, metabolism, and excretion of many medications due to physiological changes at the organ and cellular level, particularly in the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract. These changes predispose the aging person to adverse effects from many medica.tions. Age-related changes in the body composition, notably changes in the propor.tion ofbody fat and water, may alter the effects of fat-soluble medications. The older person often has multiple chronic diseases that may further impair not only the pharmacokinetics of drugs, but also their pharmacodynamic effects. Older persons are at particular risk of adverse effects because most take multiple medications. On the other hand, evidence supports the use of medications in even very old persons as long as there is a significant likelihood of a benefit balanced against the risk and a proper indication for the use of each drug. The dosage of each medication must be appropriate and there must be an appreciation of the possibility of interac.tions amongst the medications. Inappropriate medication prescribing for older persons comes in several variet.ies, including prescribing medications not suitable for older and frail persons, com.binations of medications that interact with one another, and medications at doses that are too high for older persons. Appropriate prescribing includes a process for monitoring the effects of each medi.cation individually and in combination with others being taken, discontinuing the medication after the intended indication for use no longer exists, and at the same time, prescribing a medication when the potential benefit clearly exceeds the risk. Multiple medications may be necessary and of benefit when the aim is to control multiple chronic illnesses. However, frequent hospitalizations, mul.tiple treating physicians, and the use of over-the-counter medications make the need for frequent periodic review essential. In addition to the side effects of each individual medication and the combina.tion of two or more medications being taken, the negative consequences associated with medications include a variety of events, such as the exacerbation of an existing disease, a decline in cognitive or functional capacity, a negative impact on quality of life, as well as an unnecessary use of health services and the associated costs. Overall Goals of Care е Promote the proper management of each person, neither overtreating nor undertreating each disease. е Promote the appropriate dose, liming, and length of use of each drug. е Promote the ability and desire of each person to adhere to the schedule of medications as pre.scribed. (continued) еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT (continued) е Demonstrate the value of monitoring the status of each person and assessing the potential hazards of each medicalion and helping caregivers recognize an adverse effect as soon as pos.sible. е Encourage the undertaking of a regular review of the drug regimen Medications CAP Trigger TRIGGERED -HIGH PRIORITY High priority triggers identify persons with nine or more medications, and those with two or more of the cond.itions listed below. This group contains up to 40% of those in a long-term care facility, a similar percentage of those receiving home care services, and 5 to10% of older persons living in the community. Both of the following should be present: . Nine or more medications . Has two or more of the following conditions: Chest pain Dizziness Edema Shortness of breath Poor health Recent deterioration NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. Note: if any of the following are present, consider completing a medication review: Fatigue Depression Delirium Recent cognitive decline Fall Nausea Recent hospitalization Weight loss Loss of appetite Nonspecific complaints such as "I don't feel well" or "I am not myself" Medications CAP Guidelines The Medications CAP can be used as a helpful tool for assessing a person's medica.tions. The triggered persons, however, are those who receive nine drugs or more or who have two or more of the conditions noted under "Triggered -High Priority:' Multiple physician prescriptions. To begin, it is important to recognize that more than one physician often may have prescribed the medications taken by the person. In addition, other medications including "natural substances" may be purchased over the counter by the person or a caregiver. All medications should be adminis.tered as ordered by the physician. If there are variations, the physician should be informed. The nurse is in the key position to observe or hear directly from the older person or his or her caregivers about signs and symptoms that may be caused by medications -a single drug or a combination of drugs. Some of the most frequent adverse effects include those in different organ sys.tems: . Central nervous system -for example, delirium, memory problems, fatigue, depression, tremor . Cardiovascular -for example, hypotension, dizziness, arrhythmias . Gastrointestinal -for example, loss of appetite, weight loss, constipation, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, bleeding . Urinary tract -for example, incontinence, urinary retention . Musculoskeletal and trauma -for example, accidents, falls, fractures, decline in functional status . Pulmonary -for example, wheezing, shortness of breath . Skin -for example, itching, rash, swelling When such symptoms are noted, the possibility of a medication causing the symp.tom should be considered. The following situations require frequent monitoring and notification of the physician: . Recent change in cognition [Also see Delirium, Cognitive Loss, and Mood CAPs.] . Recent change in functional capacity [Also see ADL CAP.] . Weight loss or gain [See Undernutrition CAP.] . Recent change in continence [See Urinary Incontinence CAP.] . Recurrent traumatic event [See Falls CAP.] . Hospitalization . The appearance of a new symptom Some drugs thatneed particular attention are often (appropriately) used in older persons. To avoid potential adverse events and interactions, it is necessary to review the medications more often in these cases. For example, the following medications require frequent monitoring, especially when initially started: . Anticoagulants such as warfarin . Diuretics . Digoxin . Antihypertensives Some medications should be avoided if other options are available. For example, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) carry a risk of gastrointestinal bleeding. The use of any psychotropic medication requires a proper indication and moni.toring over time. [See Behavior CAP.] Medications with anxiolytic, sedative, and hypnotic effects should be used in the lowest possible dose. In addition, these medi.cations should be prescribed for the shortest possible time. The aim of the medication regimen is to achieve the desired outcome with the fewest medications and the lowest possible dosages. However, the use of multiple medications may often be indicated. Multiple Medications Examples of potentially APPROPRIATE polypharmacy: е Persons with diabetes may be prescribed severat types of insulin in addition to oral medica.tions. In addition, cholesterol or blood pressure lowering agents may be needed. е Persons with a history of a myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, or hypertension often require several medications. е Persons with Parkinson's disease often receive multiple medications. Examples of potentially DANGEROUS situations: е Persons may be taking Lhe same pharmaceutical agent under two different trade names. е Persons may be taking a medication for a problem when a nonpharmacological intervention might be of equal or greater benefit. Some of the most often seen and potentially (but not always) hazardous combinations of drugs include: е warfarin and a long list of medicalions е potassium sparing diuretic and potassium contait1ing medication The physician should be informedwhen a drug, prescribedon a PRN basis, has notbeen needed for a significanttime. On the other hand, some symptoms, such as pain in a severely ill person, may be undertreated and require an increase in the dose or frequency of administration of the medication or a different pharmaceuti.cal altogether. [See Pain CAP.] Medication prescribing recommendations derived from clinical practice guidelines have frequently been designed for younger persons with a single chronic condition. When usedfor older persons with multiple illnesses, theyshouldbe reviewed carefully. An appropriate medication regimen in older persons taking even a single medica.tion, but particularly those taking multiple medications, is presented as a guideline to facilitate the learning process: . Medication prescription is based on a person's unique needs (indication) and care preferences, and that person's life expectancy as documented in the med.ical record. . The potential benefit of a medication should outweigh the risk of its use. Any combination of medications should provide potentially greater benefit than any of its components alone. . In most circumstances, an agreement with the older person, or his or her informal caregiver, should be sought and the care preferences of the person explored as to the need for every new medication and duration of the treat.ment. . The person, or the formal and informal caregivers, should be provided with information about the dosage and schedule of the medication, how soon the expected effect will appear, and what adverse effects might be seen. There must be a specific measurable goal for each medication, and there should be a monitoring plan that may result in a change in the goal or the medication. . Most medications for older persons should be started with a low dose, with the dose increased until the expected effect is reached or an adverse effect is noted. "Start low, go slow:' . The effects of the medication (desired and/or undesired) should be docu.mented regularly by the appropriate health care professional. . If a medication is discontinued, the condition of the person should be moni.tored and documented over time. . Many long-acting medications used for anxiety, for example, should be avoided under most circumstances. . A medication error or nonadherence to a prescribed regimen requires that the physician be notified. . A list of medications should include all prescribed medications, over-the.counter medications, and all preparations not classified as medications that have a potential effect on other medications being taken or on the person's condition. This list should be provided to all physicians caring for the person, including consultants. Contact the physician if questions about medications arise. The nursing staff may help inform the person and/or his or her caregivers about the effects of the medications and the care plan. The nursing staff is in a key position to monitor any clinical changes associated with a change in medications. Some drug-related conditions and symptoms can be detected by systematic monitoring. This may be deemed appropriate over an agreed period of time, for example 3, 7, or 14 days. Symptoms may best be documented according to time of the day, thereby demonstrating a relationship to a medication. Such systematic monitoring may also suggest the need for a new medication. Disclaimer: This CAP is not intended to be an all-inclusive guide to medica.tion management. A nurse should always contact a physician if there is any indication of an unexpected medication-related symptom or indeed a changein the clinical situation. Additional Resources Boyd CM, Darer J, Boult C, Fried LP, Boult L, Wu AW. 2005. Clinical practice guidelines and quality of care for older patients with multiple comorbid dis.eases: Implications for pay for performance. JAMA 294: 716-24. Doshi JA, Schaffer T, Briesacher BA. 2005. National estimates of medication use in nursing homes: Findings from the 1997 Medicare current beneficiary survey and the 1996 medical expenditure survey. JAGS 53: 438-43. Fialova D, Topinkova E, Gambassi G, Finne-Soveri H, Jonsson PV, Carpenter I, Schroll M, Onder G, S0rbye LW, Wagner C, Reissigova J, Bernabei R for AdHOC projectresearch group. 2005. Potentially inappropriate medication use among home care elderly patients in Europe. JAMA293: 1348-58. Fick DM, Cooper JW, Wade WE, Waller JL, Maclean JR, BeersMH. 2003. Updating the Beers criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. Arch Intern Med. 163: 2716-24. Gandhi TK, Weingart SN, Borus J, Seger AC, Peterson J, Burdick E, Seger DL, Shu K, Frederico F, Leape LL, Bates DW. 2003. Adverse drug effects in ambu.latory care. NEJM 348(16): 1556-64. Knight EL, Avorn J. 2001. Quality indicators for appropriate medication use in vulnerable elders. A nn Intern Med 135(8S}: 703-10. Lane CJ, Bronskill SE, Sykora K, Dhalla IA, Anderson GM, MamdaniMM, Gill SS, Gurwitz JH, Rochon PA. 2004. Potentially inappropriate prescribing in Ontario community-dwelling older adults and nursing home residents. JAGS 52: 861-66. McLeod PJ, Huang AR, Tamblyn RM, Gayton DC. 1997. Defining inappropriate practices in prescribing for elderly people: A national consensus panel. CMAJ 156: 385-91. Monastero R, PalmerK, Qiu C, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L. 2007. Heterogeneity in risk factors for cognitive impairment, no dementia: Population-based lon.gitudinal study from the Kungsholmen project. AMJ Geriatr Psych iatry 15(1}: 60-69. Redelmeier DA, Tan SH, Booth GL. 1998. The treatment of unrelated disorders in patients with chronic medical diseases. NEJM 338: 1516-20. Simon SR, Chan KA, Soumerai SB, Wagner AK, Andrade SE, Feldstein AC, Lafata JE, Davis RL, Gurwitz JH. 2005. Potentially inappropriate medication use by elderly persons in U.S. health maintenance organizations, 2000-2001. JAtGS 53: 227-32. Socialstyrelsen. 2003. Indikatorer for utvardering av kvaliteten i aldres lakeme.delsterapi. Socialstyrelsens forslag. Artikelnummer: 110-20. Veehof LJG, Stewart RE, Haaijer-Ruskamp FM, Meyboom-de-Jong B. 2000. The development of polypharmacy. A longitudinal study. Family Practice 17: 261-67. Zhan C, Sangi J, Bierman AS, et al. 2001. Potentially inappropriate medication use in the community-dwelling elderly. JAMA 286: 2823-29. Useful Links DruglnfoNet: www.druginfonet.com Janusinfo: www.janusinfo.orgPharmacy-related databases: www.pharmacy.org/wwwdbs Authors Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD Daniela Fialova, PharmD, PhD Palmi V. Jonsson, MD Bruce Leff, MD Gunnar Ljunggren MD, PhD Knight Steel, MD Katarzyna Szczerbinska, MD, PhD Liv Wergeland S0rbye, RN, MA, PhD Eva Topinkova, MD, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 25 Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP Problem The Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP is concerned with issues related to the con.sumption of alcohol and the use of tobacco. Excessive consumption of alcohol and any use of tobacco are associated with a variety of unhealthy consequences for per.sons of any age. There is strong evidence that any amount of smoking can be harmful to the smoker, as well as to members of the household and health care staff exposed to second-hand smoke. In addition to the well-known risks of cancer and cardiorespi.ratory disease, tobacco use is an important risk factor for injury (for example, fire, explosion) and reduced quality of life. Epidemiological studies suggest that small to moderate amounts of alcohol con.sumption may have beneficial effects. The identification of safe levels of alcohol consumption is a complex problem. Alcohol is less well tolerated by females than males. Some racial groups have especially poor alcohol tolerance. One drink is defined as the consumption of 0.5 ounces (15 ml) of pure alcohol (ethanol}. This amount of ethanol is present in 12 ounces (350 ml} of beer, 5 ounces (140 ml} of wine, or 1.5 ounces ( 45 ml) of spirits. Dietary guidelines in the United States define moderate drinking in men as no more than two drinks a day and for women as no more than one drink a day. Background. Smoking is the number one cause of preventable deaths in the world. Approximately 50% of smokers die of a smoking-related illness. The adverse effects of cigarette smoking are more prominent among older adults because of the accu.mulative injury of many years of exposure. While in younger persons (under 65 years old), the major impact of smoking is an excess risk of cardiovascular dis.ease, the major cause of excess mortality in older adults relates to carcinoma of the lung. Chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD) and cardiovascular disease are also important causes of excess mortality associated with smoking in older persons. Cessation of smoking is associated with major reductions in the risk of most smoking-related illnesses, even in older adults. Furthermore, cessation of smoking even a few weeks before elective surgery may decrease the risks of the procedure. Older persons are more likely to quit smoking than younger persons, but the bene.fits of cessation appear to be less powerful, primarily because of previously accumu.lated effects. Nonetheless, smoking cessation remains the most important method of reducing smoking associated with mortality and morbidity in older persons. Excess alcohol consumption is often considered to be an issue primarily for younger persons. But disorders related to alcohol are common among older adults and are associated with considerable physical, cognitive, psychological, and social morbidity. Alcohol misuse is more common among men, and socially isolated, sin.gle, and separated persons. Older adults are less likely to volunteer information about drinking patterns, and coupled with the perception that alcohol abuse is a problem of younger persons, there is a lower detection rate in older adults. Alcohol excess may present with "atypical" (uncommon) features such as falls, depression, and confusion. Appropriate levels of alcohol consumption vary by age and sex, although opin.ions vary among authorities. For example, the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) in the United States recommends that persons older еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT than 65 should consume no more than one drink per day. In addition, drug-alcohol interactions and increased potential for accidental injury may be a further concern related to alcohol use among older adults or persons with co-morbid medical or mental health conditions. Overall Goals of Care е Ensure that persons who smoke are provided with appropriate advice and support for smoking cessation. е Offer appropriate advice, support, and treatment to reduce alcohol consumption if indicated and to reduce the risk of harm among persons who consume high levels of alcohol. Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP Trigger TRIGGERED NOT TRIGGERED This CAP seeks to identify strategies for helping persons cease smoking and cut back on excessive drinking. Persons to whom one or more of the following apply (note that not all of these items appear on every assessment instrument): . Person feels a need to cut back on drinking or has been told by others to cut down on drinking . Person who needs a drink first thing in the morning . Person who has had five or more drinks at a single sitting in the last 14 days . Daily smoker This triggered group includes about 10% of persons receiving home care, 5% of per.sons in long-term care facilities, and 7% of older adults living independently in the community. All other persons. Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP Guidelines Tobacco Use First, establish the pattern and duration of smoking. . Consider the current health context. If existing morbidity is associated with smoking (such as ischemic heart disease, stroke, or COPD), there may be a higher level of motivation to quit. . Consider whether the person lives with a partner who is a nonsmoker -this increases the likelihood of cessation. Mention the partner in the discussions around smoking cessation, but depending on the nature of the relationship, be aware that the dynamics of the relationship may affect smoking behaviors. . Take into account hazardous situations such as the use of oxygen in the home. Older adults are more likely to cease smoking, particularly if theyindicate that they are motivated. Your efforts will be most fruitful with persons who are in this category. . The presence of depression may contribute to continuation of smoking, and if there is evidence that it is present, take appropriate measures to further evalu.ate and manage it. [See Mood CAP.] Other treatment considerations: . Advice by itself, is rarely effective. . In general, some of the most common strategies typically prescribed by physi.cians are the provision of both counseling and pharmacological agents. Professionals with appropriate training should provide these services. In the case of pharmaceutical agents, the professional must have the authority to prescribe. Nicotine gum, patches, and sprays (Nicotine Replacement Therapy) may be available over the counter in some countries. In general, the combination of counseling and medication appears to pro.duce the best results. Alcohol Use First, ascertain the overall pattern of alcohol consumption. This should include current patterns, as well as the lifelong history. This may be a sensitive matter, which may need to be addressed indirectly. There is evidence that many older adults underreport consumption. The following should lead to an increased emphasis on addressing the drink.ing problem: . The person considers a need to reduce the level of drinking. . Others are concerned about the person's drinking habits. . The person feels guilty or ashamed about drinking. . The person sometimes needs a drink first thing in the morning (an "eye.opener"). Information about co-morbid health status may be important. lf the person has a number of illnesses, including those affecting cognition, or is taking multiple medications, the level of consumption may need to be minimal or none at all. . Consider the circumstances that may have created an alcohol-related disor.der, for example, bereavement, role changes, or declining health. . Evaluate the impact of alcohol consumption on the person's health, physical and psychological function, as well as social function. . If alcohol consumption appears excessive, and particularly if there are associ.ated health problems, medical involvement is essential. Alcohol withdrawal may be associated with serious medical consequences. If a decision to with.draw alcohol is made in a person with a history of heavy consumption, par.ticularly if there are co-morbidities, admission to a hospital for detoxification may be necessary and is recommended by some authorities. There are two broad presentations of alcohol disorders: . Lifelong excessive consumption . Later life increased consumption Especially if excessive alcohol intake is a recent issue, consider the possibility of depression as a precipitating factor. [See Mood CAP.] Ascertain the person's perception of the extent of alcohol consumption and motivation to curtail (cut back)consumption. Persons with addictions to tobacco, alcohol, or other substances may be at different stages of readiness for change. For example, some may be unaware of their problem or have never considered chang.ing their behavior. They may not be prepared to consider any changes to their cur.rent health behaviors. Others may be thinking about changing their use of these substances. Consequently, they may be more open to receiving information about treatment options and support programs. Potential interventions: . Short-term inpatient treatment may be necessary for detoxification or to deal with withdrawal symptoms. . Psychotropic medications may be useful, although care must be taken in their use with older adults. . Group therapy is a frequently used treatment. It creates opportunities to enhance self-image, share anxieties, and restore the ability to enter into rela.tionships. Older alcoholics participating in group treatment tend to fare bet.ter when the group is age-specific. Some anecdotal evidence also suggests that the most successful groups may be gender-specific. . Alcohol dependency, especially for early-onset alcoholics, is a chronic disease from which recovery is often a long-term process. . Referral to a substance abuse professional, especially one with experience with geriatric patients, may be useful. . As in all substance abuse treatment, often the involvement of family and the person's support network in the treatment process may be critical. Indeed, the intervention may have to be focused at least initially on the effect on the fam.ily. This is necessary not only for the treatment of the person, but also because family members may be suffering from serious psychological and sometimes physical trauma as a result of the person's behavior. Additional Resources Burns DM. 2000. Cigarette smoking among the elderly: Disease consequences and the benefits of cessation.Am JHealth Promot 14(6): 357-61. Dale LC, Olsen DA, Patten CA, et al. 1997. Predictors of smoking cessation among elderly smokers treated for nicotine dependence. Tobacco Control 6(3): 181-87. O'Connell H, Chin AV, Cunningham C, Lawlor B. 2003. Alcohol use disorders in elderly people -redefining an age old problem in old age. BM/ 327(7416): 664-67. Prochaska JO, Di Clemente CC, Norcross JC. 1992. In search of how people change: Applications to addictive behaviors. Am Psychol 47(9): 1102-14. Ranney L, Melvin C, Lux L, McClain E, Lohr KN. 2006. Systematic review: Smoking cessation intervention strategies for adults and adults in special popu.lations.Ann Intern Med 145(11): 845-56. Authors Len Gray, MD, PhD John P. Hirdes, PhD Charles Phillips, PhD, MPH Knight Steel, MD Section 26 Urinary Incontinence CAP Problem Urinary incontinence is the inability to control urine in a socially appropriate man.ner. In the United States, 15% of older adults living at home have a urinary inconti.nence problem. In long-term care facilities, over 50% of persons experience urinary incontinence either occasionally or on a regular basis. This problem is often cited as a factor in the decision to move from a home environment to an assisted living facility or a long-term care facility. Although it frequently increases with age, urinary incontinence is not a normal part of the biological process of aging. Regrettably, it is often embarrassing and therefore not even mentioned to the health care provider. Discussing the problem openly with the person and family members is the first step in developing a success.ful plan of care. Urinary incontinence causes many problems, including skin rashes, falls, iso.lation, pressure ulcers, and the potentially troubling use of indwelling catheters. Catheter use increases the risk of life-threatening infections. Use of catheters also contributes to discomfort and the needless use of medications that are often required for the treatment of the associated bladder spasms. Overall Goals of Care е Recognize urinary incontinence and establish the cause. е Expedite improvement in bladder function in those who could improve by instituting appro.priate diagnostic and therapeutic inLerventions. е Prevent increasing degrees ofincontinence in persons who are already incontinent and may benefit from a treatment program. Urinary Incontinence CAP Trigger The goal of this CAP is first to expedite improvement in bladder function in those who could so improve, and second, to prevent worsening of bladder function in persons who may have the ability to respond to a treatment program. The following rules indicate the two subgroups of persons triggered for specialized follow-up, as well as the two subgroups that are not targeted for follow-up. TRIGGERED TO FACILITATE IMPROVEMENT IN BLADDER FUNCTION Included in this group are persons who have all of the following characteristics: . Have reoccurring episodes of incontinence (even if less than weekly) or no urine output. . Have at least a minimal level of cognitive abilities (as indicated by being Inde.pendent or having Modified Independence in Cognitive Skills for Daily Deci.sion Making). . Not totally dependent or receiving extensive assistance in locomotion, and . Have either or both of the following acute triggering criteria: еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Not on a scheduled toileting program One or more of the following indicators are present that suggest the person is in a fluctuating status, and thus his or her urinary incontinence may be of more recent onset, or subject to improvement: е Hip fracture е Recent decline in AD Ls е Use of an indwelling catheter е Pneumonia е Diarrhea This group includes about 5% of persons in long-term care facilities, 10% of persons receiving home care, and 2% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 22% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period. The rate of improvement in home care is about the same, at 16%. At the same time, however, some in this group will decline over 90 days; in long-term care facilities about 15% will decline and in home care about 10% will decline. TRIGGERED TO PREVENT DECLINE -Higher Rate of Decline Expected Included in this group are persons who have all of the following characteristics: . Reoccurring episodes of incontinence (even if less than weekly) or no urine output. . Independent to Moderately Impaired in Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making (thus they are not Severely Impaired). . Do not meet the two above acute criteria under the Improvement Trigger (the scheduled toileting program and the fluctuating status criteria). This group includes about 40% of persons in long-term care facilities, 24% of per.sons receiving home care, and 5% of older adults living independently in the com.munity. In a long-term care facility setting, about 20% of the persons triggered into this group will decline over a 90-day period, while 10% will improve. The rate of decline in home care is about 10%, while the improvement rate is also about 10%. NOT TRIGGERED -Continent This group consists of those who are continent at the time of assessment. This group includes about 35% of persons in long-term care facilities, 55% of persons receiving home care, and 92% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 13% of the persons triggered into this group will decline over a 90-day period. The rate of decline in home care is about 11 %. NOT TRIGGERED -Poor Decision Making This group is assessed as Severely Impaired (or having no discernable conscious.ness) for Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making at the time of assessment. This group includes about 15% of persons in long-term care facilities, 11% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 26% of the persons triggered into this group will decline over a 90-day period, while 4% will improve. In home care the rate of decline is about 20%, while the improvement rate is about 8%. Urinary Incontinence CAP Guidelines Urinary incontinence is the inability to control urine in a socially appropriate man.ner, and for many this means. the person cannot hold his or her urine until he or she reaches a toilet. There are multiple classifications of incontinence, the com.mon causes being grouped into five general categories: stress, urge, mixed (stress and urge), overflow, and functional. There are a number of causes of each (see the following), and there are considerable differences between men and women in the likelihood of each type. To a great extent this reflects differences in the length of the urethra, the tube exiting the bladder, and in women who have experienced preg.nancy or childbirth, changes in the anatomy of the pelvis. In addition, many older adults are incontinent because they simply cannot make it to the bathroom in time, for example, those who have limitations in ambulation because of arthritis or a stroke. Types ofIncontinence Stress incontinence. Incontinence that occurs during coughing, sneezing, laugh.ing, lifting heavy objects, or making other movements that put pressure or stress on the bladder. Leakage tends to be of small amounts of urine with the stimulus. In some reports this condition is the most common form of incontinence in women, resulting from weak pelvic muscles or a weakening of the wall between the bladder and the vagina. In women, the weakness is commonly due to pregnancy and child.birth or lower levels of the hormone estrogen during menstrual periods or after menopause. In men, stress incontinence may occur postprostatectomy. Often stress incontinence is eliminated or markedly reduced in frequency by . Pelvic floor muscle rehabilitation, for which there is strong evidence of effec.tiveness for persons with stress incontinence. This should be the first line of treatment offered. . Lifestyle counseling to encourage appropriate amounts of fluid, limited alco.hol and caffeinated drinks, and weight loss for overweight persons. . Medications may be prescribed by a physician to be used in combination with pelvic floor strengthening exercises, but the drugs may have side effects. . Biofeedback, acupuncture, and electrical stimulation have been used in con.junction with pelvic floor reeducation programs with varying levels of effec.tiveness. . lntravaginal devices, for example, pessaries . Implants . Surgery Urge incontinence (also called overactive or spastic bladder). An unplanned loss of urine after feeling a sudden urge to urinate such as while sleeping, drinking water, or listening to water running. Leakage tends to be of significant amounts of urine with each episode. Treatments for urge incontinence include . Biofeedback . Timed voiding . Bladder training . Medications such as anticholinergics and antispasmotics to relax muscles and block nerve signals leading to bladder spasms Mixed incontinence. Involuntary leakage associated with urgency and also with exertion, effort, sneezing, or coughing. The predominant condition, stress or urge incontinence, should be treated first. Overflow incontinence. Incontinence that occurs when the bladder is constantly full and reaches a point where it overflows and leaks urine. This condition can occur when the urethra is blocked due to causes such as urinary stones, tumors, or an enlarged prostate. It may also be the result of weak bladder muscles, due to nerve damage from diabetes or other diseases. This is a common form of incontinence in men. Treatment may involve . Timed voiding . Bladder training . Intermittent catheterization . Medication such as those listed below have been prescribed by physicians to improve urine flow or shrink the prostate: Alpha blockers are used to treat problems caused by prostate enlargement and bladder outlet obstruction. Medications such as alpha reductase inhibitors have been prescribed to shrink an enlarged prostate. . Surgery and radiation Functional incontinence. A loss of urine in a person whose urinary tract function is such that he or she should be able to maintain continence, but who because of physical disabilities, external obstacles, or problems in thinking or communicating is unable to get to the bathroom before urinating. Eliminating or reducing the func.tional incontinence depends on identifying and treating the underlying problem. [See ADL CAP to improve mobility and transfers.] Incontinence Assessment There are multiple factors that cause or contribute to incontinence. Identifying and improving these factors can improve continence. It is important to be aware of risk factors for incontinence in order to raise the topic, as it is sometimes difficult for persons to discuss continence issues. Risk factors include age, childhood prob.lems such as bedwetting, prostatectomy in men, and pregnancy and childbirth in women. High Body Mass Index (BMI) is also a risk factor. Menopause is a contrib.uting factor in women. It is important to obtain a good history and description of the problem, with the goal of determining whether the incontinence is transient or established in char.acter. The description can include information from standardized tests of function and symptoms, a urinary diary (detailing the times and amount of incontinence as well as the circumstances -for example, when coughing, and the amount of urine voided when the person does reach the bathroom), and stress tests such as cough.ing to see if they elicit incontinence. Testing methods include the following: . Physical exam {includes pelvic and rectal exams) . Stress testing (for example, having a woman cough and see if there is leakage of urine) . Observation of voiding or uroflometer (looking for stream size, hesitation, volume of urine) . Urinalysis . Urine culture . Evaluation of postvoid residual urine is an important diagnostic parameterthat should be considered in persons with complex histories. . Cystoscopy . Urodynamic evaluation Modifiable factors contributing to transitory urinary incontinence are listed below, and they can be addressed to improve continence. Treatable underlying factors that should be routinely "ruled out" are presented under the acronym "DIAPPERS:' Delirium Infection (UTI) Atrophic vaginitis Pharmaceuticals/Medications (of many types) Psychological and psychiatric problems Excessive urine output Restricted mobility Stool constipation/impaction The following are potential underlying causes of incontinence that can be addressed to improve continence: . Delirium -Identify cause of delirium, including recent hospitalizations as well as pharmaceutical agents. [See Delirium CAP.] . Infection (UTI) -A symptomatic urinary tract infection (blood in urine, frequency of urination, urge, burning on urination, WBC elevation in urinaly.sis). Refer for further medical examination to include urinalysis, culture, and course of antibiotics. . Atrophic vaginitis -These conditions in postmenopausal women often cause lower urinary tract symptoms. Use of appropriate creams or the use of an estrogen ring may be helpful. . Atrophic urethritis -This condition leads to thinning of the lining of the urethra, causing local irritation and loss of the mucosal seal. Incontinence due to atrophic urethritis is often characterized by urgency and dysuria (painful urination). . Pharmaceuticals/Medications -Medications may cause persons to have transient incontinence, but they may also be useful in improving inconti.nence. It is helpful to review the person's medications for potential effects on incontinence as well as to search the literature for new medications that may be helpful. Alcohol use and medication use are common causes of transient incontinence in older adults. [See Appropriate Medications CAP, as well as Tobacco and Alcohol CAP.] Diuretics ("fluid pills" taken to reduce blood pressure, or for CHF) can lead to sudden onset of urge incontinence. Anticholinergics can lead to overflow incontinence (these medications cause the bladder not to contract, the bladder becomes full, and urine leaks out). Nighttime incontinence can be caused or exacerbated by heart failure, peripheral venous insufficiency, and medications. Before altering a person's medication, a physician must be contacted. . Psychological and psychiatric problems -Severe depression. [See Mood CAP.) Initial treatment focuses on depression. . Excessive urine output -This condition can be caused by high fluid intake (including alcohol and caffeine). The person should be encouraged to adjust his or her fluid intake to produce a 24-hour urinary output of between 1,000 ml and 2,000 ml. . Restricted mobility -This can prevent a person from reaching the toilet in time and may result from physical limitations, inability to get out of a bed or chair independently, impaired vision, fear of falling, or foot problems. [See ADL CAP for suggestions on improving mobility and Physical Activities Pro.motion CAP for suggestions on exercise.] Consider environmental adaptations-for example, offering mobility aids, facilitating entry to the bathroom, placing a commode near the bed at night, and instituting an assisted toileting program. . Stool constipation/impaction -Presence of constipation may lead to an impaction (a mass of hardened stool stuck in the intestinal tract). Presence of a fecal impaction may lead to pressure or stimulation of the bladder. Usually these persons have urge or overflow incontinence. Removing the impaction should restore continence. Appliances and Pads Factors to Consider for Brief/Pad Use: е Fit е Cost е Absorbency е Gender of the user е Activity level of the user (person mostly sits all day, or person walks around and changes posi.tion more frequently) е Ability of the user to inserl and remove brief/pad е Ability of the user to clean/launder brief-type garments е AbiJit y of the user to handle disposable pad waste What to Use: е There is no one-size-lits-all brief/pad. е lt is best to try a small quantity of a few different types/brands of pads/briefs. е Pads placed on chairs are not very useful for an active person. Also, they are very noticeable. Additional Resources Balmforth JR, Mantle J, Bidmead J, Cardozo L. 2006. A prospective observa.tional trial of pelvic floor muscle training for female stress urinary inconti.nence. BJU Int. (October) 98(4): 811-17. European Association of Urology: www.uroweb.org. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. 2007. NICE Guideline 50, Urinary incontinence. National Collaborating Center for Acute Care, London, England. www.nice.org.uk NAFC: National Association for Continence; www.nacf.org. 1-800-BLADDER; 1-800-252-3337 National Institutes of Health: www.nih.gov; including the AGE Pages: www.niapublications.org/ shopagepages SIGN: Scottish Incontinence Guidelines Network. Management of Urinary Incon.tinence in Primary Care. www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/sign79.pdf Urinary incontinence: 2005. Clinical Practice Guideline, AMDA. Wainner, RS. 2005. Urinary incontinence is no longer just your grandmother's concern. www.texpts.com/uplimg/UINotJustGrandmotherProblem.pdf Authors Pauline Belleville-Taylor, RN, MS, CS Knight Steel, MD Katherine Berg, PhD, PT John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 27 Bowel Conditions CAP Problem The Bowel Conditions CAP addresses three of the most common bowel conditions seen in older adults and disabled adults: constipation, diarrhea, and fecal inconti.nence. A standard definition of constipation does not exist. Perhaps most commonly it is defined in the literature as not having a bowel movement for 3 or more days. If a person does not have a bowel movement for this period of time, usually the stool is harder than normal and may be difficult to expel. Some persons have hard stools or find it uncomfortable to have a bowel movement even if the frequency is daily. Such persons usually tell their physician that they are constipated. Constipation accounts for about 2.5 million physician visits per year. The prevalence of constipation in older persons living in the community is about 20%. Its high prevalence in older adults likely reflects in part changes in the colon associated with the aging process. Diarrhea may refer to frequent bowel movements and/or to loose or watery stools. This condition, like the others, may be chronic or acute. Often it is associ.ated with abdominal pain, fever, or other symptoms. Diarrhea may be just mildly annoying or life threatening. It may be caused by an acute infectious agent or may reflect a disease especially of the colon (for example, diverticulitis} or the small intestine. It may also be noted when the person's colon is impacted with stool and only loose stool is expelled. Isolated fecal incontinence may be a rare occurrence. Often it is associated with one of the two previous complaints or it may be a chronic and exceptionally dif.ficult issue to manage. On occasion it may reflect damage to the anal sphincter,especially if it is a frequent occurrence. It is especially of concern to many because of its impact on social functioning. Overall Goals of Care е Recognize the existence of one or more of these three conditions and establish a cause for its existence. е Address each in such a way that the person is able to function as normally as possible. е Be able to monitor bowel function over time. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Bowel Conditions CAP Trigger The goal of this CAP is twofold: first, to facilitate improvement in bowel status whenever possible; and second, to prevent avoidable bowel decline. To identify these triggered groups, one must first calculate two risk summaries (decline and improvement). . First, count the number of the following Risk of Decline criteria: Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making (Severely Impaired); Eating (Supervision through Total Dependence); Bed mobility (Total Dependence, Did not occur); Bladder continence (Incontinent); Easily distracted (Behavior different); Periods of altered perceptions or awareness of surroundings (Behavior dif.ferent); Episodes of disorganized speech (Behavior different); Mental function varies over the course of the day (Behavior different). . Second, count the number of the following Risk of Improvement items: Toilet use (Independent through Limited Assistance); Formal caregivers and direct care staff believe the person is capable of increased independence; Pneumonia; Deteriorated; Bladder continence (Continent and Usually continent); Hip fracture in the last 180 days. TRIGGERED TO FACILITATE IMPROVEMENT All of the following must be present: . Risk of Decline count (from previous section) equal to 0 or 1, and . Risk of Improvement count (from previous section) equal to 2 or higher, and . Bowel continence: Infrequently incontinent to Incontinent This group includes about 5% of persons in long-term care facilities, 7% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 33% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period (while 19% will decline); the rate of improvement in home care is about 20% (while 6% will decline). TRIGGERED TO PREVENT DECLINE All of the following must be present: . Risk of Decline count (from previous section) equal to 2 or higher, and . Bowel continence: Not fully incontinent This group includes about 15% of persons in long-term care facilities, 6% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 30% of the persons triggered into this group will decline over a 90-day period (while 11% will improve); the rate of decline in home care is about 14% (while 13% will improve). NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. Some of these persons have bowel problems at the time of assess.ment, and would receive normal care for bowel problems when present. Bowel Conditions CAP Guidelines Assessment and Care Planning A person having any of these conditions must be evaluated to determine the dura.tion of the symptom, its severity, and the presence of any other complaints. Look for indications of malaise, abdominal pain, fever, or the presence of blood in the stool or dark stools (which may reflect bleeding higher up in the GI tract). All per.sons with a significant change in bowel habits, fever, blood in the stool, associated pain, or persistent abnormalities require medical evaluation. One or more of these three conditions may reflect a decline in mobility, a recent change in diet, the introduction of a new medication, decreased fluid intake (for any reason), or even excessive environmental heat. Once the cause is determined, the key concern for optimal care planning is the promotion of a pattern of bowel function such that the person does not experience discomfort or any social inconvenience. Bowel Problem Assessment What is the history of the problem? . How many bowel movements did the person have within the last few days? Is this pattern "normal" for the person? What was the consistency of the stool? . Was there evidence of blood in the stool (either red stool or unusually dark stool)? . If there was incontinence, was it a large amount of stool, or just a small amount? Was the person fully aware of the passage of the stool? . Is there a history of anorectal or colonic surgery, or in a female, damage to the rectum at the time of delivery? . Is there a history of intolerance to certain foods, especially milk? . Has the person passed excessive amounts of gas or felt bloated? . Did the person have a fever or experience malaise? . Did the person vomit or have abdominal pain? . Is there a recent change in the person's diet, fiber, or fluid intake? . Does the person have a known condition, such as diverticulosis or diabetes, that might help explain the symptoms? . What medications is the person taking? Have any new medications been started recently? . Is there a history of laxative use and, if so, has it been excessive? What are the characteristics of the stool? . Description of stool type: consistency, color, unusual odors, presence of frank blood. . Is the person straining when he or she tries to defecate? . Does the person have pain associated with bowel movements? What are the characteristics of the bowel pattern? . Does the person have a pattern for moving his or her bowels? . Is it different recently? . Does the person need to share a bathroom, or is he or she otherwise not assured of privacy when using the toilet? Care Planning Suggestions Care plan suggestions for persons with constipation. Strategies for improving diet, activity, and bowel pattern can be woven into the daily life of the person. . Especially if of recent onset, evaluation by a physician is indicated to rule out a colonic tumor or other such cause. . Identify the person's bowel pattern. Record the person's bowel movements and ask about his or her bowel habits. If fecal impaction is indicated it may be necessary to perform a rectal exam to determine the presence of stool in the rectum. . Identify the presence of hemorrhoids or anal fissures. Consult a physician and provide topical anesthetics as needed. . Assess the person for the presence of dementia or depression. Persons with depression need to be referred for mental health services. Persons with a dementia will benefit from a habit-training or bowel-training program. . Ask about the person's medications and any laxative or enema use. Anticholin.ergics, narcotics, calcium channel blockers, some incontinence medications, iron, diuretics, tranquilizers, and antacids can cause constipation. Excessive use of laxatives and enemas can increase problems with constipation. . Ask about the person's daily diet. Provide fluids and encourage the person to increase fluid intake. Increasing fiber intake should be done slowly over a mat.ter of a few weeks to a month. . Encourage toileting opportunities. Provide a bedside commode or an elevated toilet seat. Remind the person to go to the toilet after breakfast, or after a meal, or whenever the person is most likely to move his or her bowels. . Provide opportunities for the person to increase daily physical activity. Regu.lar walking and other physical activities can help to decrease or eliminate con.stipation. Care plan suggestions for persons with fecal incontinence: . Referral to a physician is indicated especially if onset is recent or associated with blood in the stool. . Encourage the person to have bowel evacuation at the same time each day. . Determine the presence of neuromuscular weakness. Persons with this prob.lem may benefit from elimination training. Administer a suppository 30 min.utes prior to scheduled elimination. . Establish and monitor a bowel regimen that includes fluids, diet modification, scheduling, stool softener, suppository, and digital stimulation. . Assess for the presence of fecal impaction. Remove impaction if present. . For persons with chronic diarrhea as the cause of fecal incontinence, the phy.sician may prescribe loperamide as a helpful medication. . For fecal incontinence due to rectal sphincter disturbances, biofeedback may be effective. . Meticulous skin care is a priority after episodes of fecal incontinence. . At times, it may be necessary to use pads or briefs. Care plan suggestions for persons with diarrhea: . If severe, acute, or associated with pain, blood in the stool, or fever, immediate medical referral is indicated. . Has the person recently been started on a new medication? . Has the person recently started tube feedings? Dilute the feedings or changethe rate of feeding. . Is lactose intolerance suspected? Remove all sources oftlactose from the diet. . Is an intestinal bacterial infection suspected? Obtain a stool specimen for analysis. . Is a fecal impaction suspected? Obtain an abdominal flat plate x-ray. Remove fecal impaction if present. . Provide plenty of fluids that are noncarbonated and nondairy. When diarrhea is persistent or present with vomiting, dehydration may soon follow. . Is lactose intolerance suspected? Remove all sources oftlactose from the diet. . Is an intestinal bacterial infection suspected? Obtain a stool specimen for analysis. . Medications for diarrhea: For nonspecific diarrhea, the physician may prescribe treatment with psyl.lium, methylcellulose, or loperamide. For infectious diarrhea, therapy is targeted to suspected or identified pathogens. . Meticulous skin care is a priority after episodes of diarrhea. Consideration of further evaluation: . Once the existence of constipation, diarrhea, or fecal incontinence has been established, it will be necessary to determine whether further testing is required. . In the person with an abrupt onset of severe diarrhea who had been taking antibiotics recently (for another reason), a stool culture and a test for the tox.ins of C difficile would be indicated. . If the person is having crampy abdominal pain and even mild diarrhea, he or she might require a C1' scan to rule out diverticulitis or other conditions. . If blood, either red or black, has been noted, this usually requires further eval.uation such as a colonoscopic study and perhaps studies of the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine as well. . In a large number of persons, the problem is chronic and appropriate inter.ventions can be implemented. Additional Resources AmericanMedical Directors Association. 2006. Clinical practice guidelines: Gastrointestinal disorders in the long-term care setting. Columbia, MD. Carpenito-MoyetL. 2004. Nursing careplans and documentation, 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins. Finne-Soveri H, Sorbye LW, Jonsson PV, Carpenter GI, Bernabei R. 2007. Increased work-load associated with fecal incontinence among home care patients in 11 European countries. Accepted for publication in the European Journal ofPublic Health. McGough MonksK. 2003. Gastrointestinal system assessment in home health nursing. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NDDIC), Bethesda, MD: www.digestive.niddk.nih.gov/about/ contact.htm NationalInstitute forHealth and Clinical Excellence. 2007. NICE Guideline 49, Faecal incontinence. National Collaborating Center for Acute Care, London, England: www.nice.org.uk Authors Pauline Belleville-Taylor, RN, MS, CS Knight Steel, MD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW List of Abbreviations AC AOL AL ATC BUN CA CAPS CF CHA CMH CVA ESP GI GU HC IAOL ICO-CM ID LTCF MOS MH NOC PAC PC PRN QOL RAI RUGS TENS WELL Acute Care Activities of Daily Living Assisted Living anatomical therapeutic chemical blood urea nitrogen Contact Assessment Clinical Assessment Protocols Mental Health for Correctional Facilities Community Health Assessment Community Mental Health cerebrovascular accident Emergency Screener for Psychiatry gastrointestinal genitourinary Home Care Instrumental Activities of Daily Living International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification Intellectual Disability Long-Term Care Facilities Minimum Data Set Mental Health National Drug Code Post-Acute Care Palliative Care pro re nata ("as needed") Self-Report Quality of Life Resident Assessment Instrument Resource Utilization Groups transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation Wellness 