Social Life CAPS 13. Activities CAP 14. Informal Support CAP 15. Social Relationship CAP Section 13 Activities CAP Problem The Activities CAP identifies persons with some cognitive reserve who have either withdrawn from activities or who are uneasy entering into activities and social rela.tionships. The goal of care is to identify strategies for helping these persons increase their activity involvement (for example, playing cards, reading books, reminiscing, or watching movies). An active lifestyle, especially one within the constraints of a person's functional capacity and prior engagement patterns, can be essential to the maintenance of a positive outlook and an overall sense of self-esteem and well-being. About two.thirds of those triggered in this CAP will neither have a consistent positive outlook nor find meaning in day-to-day life. From this perspective, it is important to reach out to these persons. We need to recognize also that their general functional and cognitive profile will not diverge significantly from other persons in their living environments. Thus, the crucial task is not to address other complicating problems, but rather to proceed directly to attempts to better engage the person in a variety of leisure activities. At the same time, the activity programs offered should be tailored to the cognitive, physical, and social abilities of the person. It is important to ensure that planning considers the preferred activities of the person, regardless of whether they are passive or active, and not the biases of the caregiver. These activities should focus on helping the person fulfill his or her wishes, use his or her physical and cognitive skills, provide enjoyment, and provide an avenue to interact with others. Overall Goals of Care е Talk with the person to identify why the person has withdrawn from activities or is ill at ease in joining with olhers. е When present, address functional, medical, or psychological causes LhaL affect Lhe person's ability to participate in activities. е Identify methods of increasing activity, while keeping in mind the person's usual preferred level of involvement. е Give the person an opportunity to succeed. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Activities CAP Trigger TRIGGERED NOT TRIGGERED This subgroup is defined by the presence of all three of the following factors: . First, the person's involvement level in activities is less than most of time; . Second, the person has some ability to engage in everyday decision making (Independent to Moderately Impaired in Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making); and . Third, two or more of the following are present: Withdrawn from activities of interest Reduced social interaction Not at ease interacting with others Not at ease doing planned or structured activities Not at ease doing self-initiated activities This subgroup includes about 25% of persons in long-term care facilities. All other persons. The "Not Triggered" subgroup includes about 75% of persons in long-term care facilities. Activities CAP Guidelines Approach to the Person with Problems Related to Activities Initial assessment. Does the person have discrete activity preferences? To answer this question one must talk with the person and/or a knowledgeable family member or friend (when they visit -and remember that about 80% of these persons will maintain strong relations with family). . What were the person's activity preferences prior to coming into the program? Were they passive or active? (For example, did the person spend large amounts of time watching television or reading?) Did they involve activities, with or without family, outside of the home (for example, church, clubs, sporting events, travel, dining)? Were they centered almost entirely on family -spouse, children, and grandchildren? Were they centered almost entirely on nonfamily/community service sup.port? . In what activities is the person currently involved? Create a comprehensive list of leisure pursuits, including those done alone and/or self-directed and those done with others and/or planned by others. Do visitors come to see the person and, if so, what kinds of activities do they pursue together? What scheduled programs does the person participate in at the time of the assessment? Does participation in programs fluctuate with seasonal program changes or are there patterns of change apparent in the person's activity involve.ment? . In what types of other activities would the person have an interest in partici.pating? Include those that are not currently available or offered to the person. . What unique skills or knowledge does the person have that he or she could pass on to others? Does he or she know how to play bridge or chess? Can he or she help others deal with complex forms (for example, tax forms)? ls he or she knowledgeable about a topic that others might also have an interest in (for example, baseball)? Determination of the nature of problems that reduce participation. . When determining activity needs or potential interventions for care planning purposes, it is important to determine "why" a person chooses to participate or not participate in leisure pursuits. Does the person hold back because of functional or cognitive reasons? Look at issues of stamina, mobility, balance, ability to express self, ability to understand others, and ability to make decisions. Consider psychosocial well-being indicators, such as initiative and social involvement. Has the person been made to feel unwelcome? Do those already involved in an activity draw boundaries that are difficult to cross? Does the person's health condition represent a barrier? ls the person incon.tinent, or is pain an issue? Is the person hindered because of embarrassment or unease due to the presence of health-related equipment (for example, tubes, oxygen tank, colostomy bag, or wheelchair)? Does the person have a lack of resources to engage in the activity? Are there opportunities for the person to get to know others in the liv.ing environment (for example, shared dining, afternoon drinks, monthly birthday parties, reminiscence groups)? Do cultural expectations lessen the person's interest in the available activities? Has the person always been uneasy in joining with others? If so, would reaching out to the person succeed (and has it in the past) or is the person just someone who requires more passive or self-directed activities? . ls it an issue of activity availability? The facility in which one lives may not have an organized program in areas that the person finds interesting -games, exercise, religious discussion. ls it possible to make participation in an activity less demanding, thereby facilitating the person's participation in the activity? Does the person have sufficient private time for independent and self.directed pursuits? . Are there environmental or staffing issues that hinder participation? Are there physical barriers that prevent the person from gaining access to the space in which the activity is held? Does the facility have enough specific staff responsible for social activities? Does staff lack time to involve others in current activity programs? Does staff intimidate the person, failing to recognize the fragile nature of the person? Treatment and monitoring. The plan to deal with inactivity and re-involvement must be tailored to the person's strengths and preferences. Activities that are too challenging may exclude the person with more severe impairments, and activities that are insufficiently challenging may not be motivating to the person. Activities programs can be used to support a variety of purposes, including rehabilitation or restoration of functioning, prevention or decline, or simply increased participation. In addition to offering activity programs, it is important to recognize that leisure education should be considered as part of a comprehensive strategy to reduce inac.tivity. For some persons it will be important that the treatment program include education and counseling on how to incorporate leisure into the person's life, whether at home or in the long-term care facility setting. Interventions that incor.porate the family into the person's leisure activities may be particularly beneficial. . Passive and self-directedl leisure activities may be the most immediate avenues to re-engage the person. About 90% of these persons would be comfortable with activities that take place in his or her own room. Among activities that would be of interest to many of those triggered are watching television, listen.ing to music, and talking one-on-one with another person. To a somewhat lesser extent, about 40% of those triggered are interested in reading. . Although there is cultural variation in the triggered group, a significant per.centage identified a preference for the following social, interactive activities: spiritually related activity (50%), playing cards (40%), and involvement in a craft (25%). . Among the physical activities of interest are exercise (about 45%) and walking outdoors (50%). . Tailor activities programs to the person's strengths and preferences. Consider whether available activity options are age appropriate and cultur.ally appropriate for the person. Would it benefit the person to extend his or her leisure pursuits to include others that may have similar interests? Avoid activities that the person would find embarrassing, demeaning, or uncomfortable. Be careful to recognize that such reactions are affected by both individual personality traits and sociocultural factors. Identify activities that may be interesting and challenging to the person but do not clearly exceed his or her cognitive or physical abilities. . Be attentive to signs of psychiatric conditions. If the person has a Depression Rating Scale (DRS) score of 3 or more, bring it to the attention of a mental health professional. This may be an indication of the presence of depression and will require appropriate intervention. . Symptoms such as withdrawal from social activities and reduced social inter.action can be the result of mental health problems such as depression or schizophrenia. . Pervasive conflict with other persons, family, or staff can create a serious bar.rier to participation in and enjoyment of activities programs. Identify ways to support conflict resolution if it appears to be prolonged. . Find ways to involve family, friends, community groups, and volunteers. Dis.cuss visiting patterns with family. Additional Resources Mace N, Perschbacher R,ToplinH, Westerman M, Carlson J, Schober G. 1997. Activities programming. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides an overview of the problem and a detailed approach to clinical assessment, dealing with obstacles and challenges, and tips for care planning.McPherson BD. 1998. Studying aging processes: Theory and research. In Aging as a social process. New York: Harcourt Brace & Company. Therapeutic RecreationDirectory: www.recreationtherapy.com is a useful Web site that provides numerous suggestions for activity programs, relevant publica.tions, and links to other related Web sites. Authors John P. Hirdes, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 14 Informal Support CAP Problem The Informal Support CAP looks to situations where a person will need the help of others, seeking to identify situations where agencies or companies may have to step in to provide help. In these situations, the needs of the person usually exceed the response capabilities of the informal care network. Informal care reflects instru.mental and personal support provided to the person by family, friends, and neigh.bors. Instrumental support (IADL) includes meal preparation, housework, manag.ing finances, and so on. Personal support (ADL) includes mobility in bed, dressing, toilet use, and so on. On any given day, independent adults will spend a certain amount of time per.forming instrumental activities, such as tidying up the residence and cooking, as well as carrying out personal activities of daily living, such as bathing, grooming, and dressing. They typically perform all or almost all instrumental and personal activities of daily living on their own. The principal exception is persons living with others, where some of the tasks of daily life may be shared or performed by others in the household. Nevertheless, with aging, as chronic diseases and disabilities increase, instru.mental activities are usually the first areas in which a loss of partial or full per.sonal self-sufficiency can be expected. As that loss occurs, family members and friends typically step forward to help the person carry out these tasks, includ.ing help with meals, shopping, and transportation. Alternatively, when there is a close personal relationship with a paid domestic helper, that person may assume additional responsibilities. The total time needed to carry out these activities will remain about what it was before, only now the person performs less of the activity, with that time replaced by family and friends performing more. Such increases in informal support seldom tear at the bonds that tie the person to the family. Love and a sense of duty drive the family to step forward. The process is usually natural and unspoken, with family simply stepping in to do what is necessary. The person is seldom left in a dangerous or untenable situation, and as a new need arises, family and friends almost always step forward to pick up all or most of the slack. Overall Goals of Care е Identify families who cannot provide informal care that will fully compensate for the care needs of persons with a decline in lADL and ADL, and develop a family-agency plan to meet the needs of the person. е Identify persons with no primary informal caregiver and consider formal care services inter.vention. е Identify persons whose problems may improve and thus whose needs may decrease, and assist the family to step forward on a short-term basis. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT In this CAP, however, we seek to identify persons whose informal support sys.tems may be at a higher risk of not fully responding to their unfolding needs. What distinguishes these persons is that when first seen they are likely to be receiving lower levels of informal help, irrespective of their functional disability level. This CAP does not seek to isolate informal helpers having stress or strain, for this factor by itself is not crucial to the level of informal care provided to the person. Informal helpers usually continue to provide help even when stress and strain are present. Informal Support CAP Trigger This CAP trigger identifies persons who currently require help with instrumental activities of daily living, focusing on those who have families that are challenged to respond fully to the emerging needs of the person. While the family members will almost always be sympathetic to the needs of the person, formal agencies need to prepare to step in to provide higher levels of formal support services to such per.sons. Where formal agencies are not yet involved, family members must be encour.aged to reach out for help. This CAP is not designed to assign blame or make a judgment on a particular per.son's informal care network. Rather, it seeks to identify persons who have an infor.mal support network that will benefit from having a "back-up" plan or alternative arrangement in place as the person declines over time. Informal support systems in situations such as this are called "brittle:' TRIGGERED IF BOTH OF THE FOLLOWING ARE TRUE . Not independent (setup help permitted) in one or more of the following IADL difficulty (capacity to perform) areas: meals, housework, shopping, and trans.portation. . Two or more of the following apply: Alone for long periods of time or all of the time during the day Lives alone or in a group setting with nonrelatives No primary informal helper present For those in the community, every point of decline in IADL capacity translates into about a 10% loss of personal self-sufficiency in instrumental activities. The trig.gered group includes about 40% of persons receiving home care and 10% of older adults living independently in the community. For this triggered group, informal replacement levels are less than one-half of the levels of those not triggered. However, should there be a change in the factors comprising the trigger (for example, no longer lives alone), the informal support system responsiveness will change. Nevertheless, for those triggered, the person is likely to find him-or herself having to continue to carry out a higher proportion of instrumental activities. This can challenge the person and result in these functional activities being less well performed. In a home care environment, the goal would be to identify where there is a gap in family response potential, and to provide a formal maintenance service whenever possible. When such service is provided, the person will receive help in completing activities that exceed his or her functional abilities. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. Informal Support CAP Guidelines Check for declines in IADLs and AD Ls, establish care needs, and identify fam.ilies who cannot provide informal care that will fully compensate. A discussion with the family (or the person) should take place to determine the nature of the dif.ficulties being faced and explore available alternatives such as the following: . Help the person move in with a loved one; the agency could consider moving support. . Draw up a joint family-agency plan for meeting the needs of the person. To create such a plan often requires that the person is eligible for formal services and that there is a payment mechanism in place to provide the needed level of services. Where this has not been determined, a formal application for service coverage will need to be made. . If access to more intensive formal care is not an option, efforts should be made to assist the family members to explore areas where they might be able to do more. In addition, a review of the other CAPs may help to identify whether there is a possibility for tthe person to improve. If the answer is "yes;' this may be helpful information for the family to be aware of because the increase in help can then be seen as a temporary measure. If the answer is "no;' the need to provide more prolonged support should be anticipated. . Some family members may be strained or burdened; relieving these condi.tions could make them willing or able to do more for the person. As a first step, review the Abusive Relationship CAP; if abuse is present, it must be addressed first. Assuming this is not the case, consider the following: Would respite care for the person provide an opportunity for family mem.bers to improve their health or relieve their strain? Are the family members misinformed of the person's status? Should family contact levels be increased? Should family members in contact with the person keep other potential helpers "in the loop"? Do family members have the capacity to purchase services to help the person? Has the person refused offers of help? Some persons will refuse efforts to address their needs, whether from informal or formal sources. Often, in such situations, the person has a history of refusing help, and all the asses.sor or the family can do is provide oversight and wait for a suitable time to offer informed counseling. Family members may be concerned about taking on more than they can handle, and a simple educational exchange may help to counter their fears about the extent to which the person will continue to decline in the imme.diate future. The primary caregiver needs specialized instruction and interim oversight on specialized care tasks (for example, how to deal effectively with new personal care needs, giving injections, or addressing emerging behavior problems). Direct counseling and enrollment in support groups may provide family members with effective strategies to manage the stress and feelings of bur.den. It may be helpful to inform the family about resources available to them in the community such as Alzheimer's family support groups or men.tal health agencies. Caregivers of such persons who are experiencing feelings of severe stress and burden may even decrease their informal care if these problems are not addressed. No primary informal caregiver is present. The 15% of persons triggered with no primary informal caregiver receive the least amount of informal care. For persons in this group, 50% are widowed, 22% never married, and 17% are divorced. Most (80%) live in private homes or apartments. As these persons' health declines, they experience an increase in informal care similar to the persons triggered in the other groups, but at a lower level than the group not triggered. . For persons with no primary informal caregiver, who are receiving some informal help (for example, a grandniece calls once a week), the agency should explore the options listed in the previous section. . For persons with no primary informal caregiver who are receiving no informal care at all, formal care services need to be considered. As stated in the previ.ous section, some persons consistently refuse formal and informal help. At times, the remaining course of action is to provide limited oversight and wait for a better time to offer informed counseling. Review other triggered CAPs for areas in which the person might improve and thus need less help in the future. If such changes are possible and likely, the fam.ily may be more willing to step forward in the short term as the level of need by the person for long-term formal care can be expected to decrease as the person becomes more self-sufficient. . CAPs of special relevance include IADL CAP, ADL CAP, Cognitive Loss CAP, Prevention CAP, Behavior CAP, Mood CAP, and Delirium CAP. Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Naoki lkegami, MD John P. Hirdes, PhD Jean-Claude Henrard, MD Pauline Belleville-Taylor, RN, MS, CS Section 15 Social Relationship CAP Problem Involvement in social relationships is a vital aspect of life, with most adults having meaningful relationships with family, friends, and neighbors. When these relation.ships are challenged, a sense of distress often clouds other aspects of life. Decreases in a person's social relationships may affect psychological well-being and have an impact on mood, behavior, and physical activity. Conversely, declines in physi.cal functioning or cognition, or a new onset or worsening of pain or other health problems, may affect both social relationships and mood. This may also be the case when one moves or has experienced the death of a loved one. Many persons who are lonely are also depressed, and it can be difficult to know which came first, but for this CAP, the crucial consideration is that both must be treated together. For example, depression can be associated with irritability and anger leading to conflict in interpersonal relationships. Good social relationships can play an important role in buffering the negative effects of stress. The Social Relationship CAP identifies factors associated with reduced social relationships and addresses interventions to facilitate social engagement. The initial interventions for this CAP thus focus on social re-engagement, mood, and behav.ior manifestations. But, one must also consider other contributing factors, such as mental health problems and poor health. Overall Goals of Care е Seek ways to engage the person with others (including caregivers). е Identify and address any serious conflicts the person has with members of his or her support network. е identify t1nderlying mental heallh problems that exacerbate interpersonal conflicts or contrib.ute to the person's withdrawal from social activities. е гdentify methods of increasmg a person's engagement in social activities, while keeping in mind the person's usual and preferred level of involvement е Treat underlying depression. [See Mood CAP.] еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Social Relationship CAP Trigger TRIGGERED FOR CARE PLAN FOLLOW-UP IF ALL THREE OF THE FOLLOWING ARE PRESENT . Feels lonely (or either fails to pursue involvement in life of the facility or is distressed by declining social activity and the person is alone for long periods of time)* . Has a reasonable level of cognitive assets (as indicated by a Cognitive Perfor.mance Scale score of 3 or lower) . Has at least some ability to understand others (as indicated by having an Ability to Understand Others score that is less that the most severe -not "Rarely/Never Understands") This group includes about 35% of persons in long-term care facilities, 15% of per.sons receiving home care, and 15% of older adults living independently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. This group includes about 65% of persons in long-term care facil.ities, 85% of persons receiving home care, and 85% of older adults living indepen.dently in the community. Social Relationship CAP Guidelines Overview ofApproach to Thinking about Social Relationships Determine lifetime relationship patterns. . Assess whether the person is lonely. . Assess if loneliness is of recent onset. For some persons, low involvement in social relationships is consistent with a lifelong pattern of social engagement. For others, recent declines in social involvement, and associated loneliness, can be a sign of acute health complications and depression. . When the assessment instrument does not include these questions, assess the following: Person says or indicates he or she feels lonely. Person feels distressed because of decline in social activities. Over the past few years, there has been an absence of daily exchanges with relatives and friends. Determine the nature of factors that may impinge on social exchanges. . Health status factors: ADL or IADL decline, especially in locomotion. Health problem {for example, falls, pain, fatigue). Mood and behavior problems. Some mental health problems may mani.fest themselves in various ways that have a direct impact on interpersonal relationships, or may arise because of the lack of contact with others. With.drawal from activities of interest and reduced social interactions can be symptoms of mental health problems. еThis parenthetical criteria applies when the loneliness item is not available on the instrument. Changes in communication, vision, or cognition. . Environmental factors: Change in residence can lead to a loss of autonomy and reduced self.esteem. Recent change in family situation or social network (for example, death of a close family member or friend). No one in the person's living environment can be involved in daily informal exchanges with him or her. . Medications may have side effects that can interfere with social interactions. Supplemental Clinical Observations Are changes in the person's patterns of social interaction only temporary fluc.tuations or are they more persistent in nature? . Are the conflicts with others new or do they reflect persistent patterns? . Does the person have a long-standing difficulty in adjusting to new situations? . Does the person no longer take pleasure in activities that were previously important? . How frequently did he or she participate in activities with others prior to the onset of a recent illness or functional decline? . Does the person make statements indicating distress over how his or her life has changed? . Do family or friends feel the person has changed in the way he or she relates to others? Has the person demonstrated strengths in psychosocial functioning? . Are there activities in wlhich the person appears especially at ease in interact.ing with others? . Are there other individuals who seem to bring out a more positive, optimistic side of the person? . What positive traits distinguished the person as an individual prior to his or her illness? . What gave the person a sense of satisfaction earlier in his or her life? Does the person have amental health or psychiatric condition that could affect social exchanges? . Does the person have a diagnosis of depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety dis.order, schizophrenia, or a personality disorder? . Calculate the MDS Depression Rating Scale (DRS). A score of 3 or more indi.cates potential depression. [See Mood CAP.] . Does the person use antipsychotic or antidepressant medications? . Does the person feel stigmatized by taking psychiatric medications or having a mental health diagnosis? . Do medication side effects impede social interactions? . Does the person have increasing frequency of disturbing behaviors? [SeeBehavior CAP.] . Is the person preoccupied with the past in a way that makes him or her unwill.ing or unable to respond to present social needs? . Has there been a decline in cognitive functioning over the last 90 to 180 days? Use the MDS Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS) to evaluate the severity of the person's cognitive impairment, if any. Are there situational factorsthat may impede the abilityto interact withothers? . Have key social relationships been altered or terminated (for example, loss of family member, friend, or staff)? . Have changes in the person's environment altered access to others or to rou.tine activities (for example, change in apartment, change in room assignment, or change in whom he or she eats with)? . Have there been changes in the person's access to activity programs (forexample, a new problem in locomotion keeps him or her from joining in with others)? . Have visiting patterns by family, friends, other acquaintances, or volunteers changed? Treatment and Monitoring Treatment and monitoring -a multi-aspect approach to care. . Ensure the person is involved in age-appropriate activities that stimulate and add meaning to life. [See Activities CAP for additional discussion.] . Treat mood disturbances, psychiatric symptoms, and behavior problems.Focus especially on reducing symptoms of depression. . If the person has a DRS score of 3 or more, bring him or her to the attention of a physician or mental health professional. This may be an indication of the presence of depression requiring appropriate intervention. [See Mood CAP.] . Help the person see beyond his or her illness to experience daily life more fully. . Build upon strengths -extend pleasurable activities, initiate new activities that follow common patterns, increase the presence of those with whom the person feels comfortable. Facilitate positive social interactions when the personhas limited interaction with family and friends. . Encourage family and friends to be more involved in the person's life. . Encourage support and care staff to enter into personal exchanges with the person. . Engage volunteers who are comfortable with the person and who make him or her feel comfortable. . Find meaningful positive activities for family members and friends to partici.pate in with the person. . Consult directly with the person to determine what types of social activities he or she likes to engage in as well as those he or she dislikes. . Encourage others to speak with the person about his or her life. Reminiscing allows the person to reconstruct his or her identity for him-or herself and for others. Additional Resources Morris JN, Gwyther L, Gerstein C, Murphy K, Levine D. 1997. Psychosocial well-being. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, and Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides information on how to conduct an in-depth evaluation of a person's psychosocial well-being as well as strategies for creating opportunities for rela.tionships and activities, interventions to enrich family visits, and approaches to care at the end of life. Stones MJ, Rattenbury C, KozmaA. 1995. Empirical findings on reminis.cence. In Haight BK, Webstera], eds. The art and science ofreminiscing: Theory, research, methods, and applications. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis. Note: This book provides a scientifically based approach to the use of reminiscence. Authors John P. Hirdes, PhD Michael J. Stones, PhD Jean-Claude Henrard, MD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Clinical Issues CAPs 16. Falls CAP 17. Pain CAP 18. Pressure Ulcer CAP 19. Cardiorespiratory Conditions CAP 20. Undernutrition CAP 21. Dehydration CAP 22. Feeding Tube CAP 23. Prevention CAP 24. Appropriate Medications CAP 25. Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP 26. Urinary Incontinence CAP 27. Bowel Conditions CAP Section 16 Falls CAP Problem A fall is defined as an unintentional change in position where the person ends up on a lower level (for example, floor, ground, or seat). Falls are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality as persons age and are an important cause of injury among younger vulnerable populations. Interventions that address risk factors for persons who have never fallen focus on multiple goals in areas assumed to be related to falling. These include exercise, balance, delirium, and drug interactions. Multiple CAPs address these issues, but the Falls CAP does not trigger on those who have never fallen. Rather, this CAP focuses on persons who have a higher risk for falling in the future as indicated by a history of prior falls. Fall rates depend on the frailty of the person, and thus will differ as a function of where the person lives and the service supports received. Over a 6-month period, the expected fall rates differ by residential setting: 40% in long-term care facilities, 35% in home care, and 20 to 30% for older adults living independently in the com.munity. Of those who fall in a 6-month period, most fall only once, and up to 10% of these persons will experience a serious injury -especially hip fractures. Falls may be an indicator of functional decline and the presence of other condi.tions, such as delirium, adverse drug reactions, dehydration, and infections. This CAP provides a systematic approach to evaluating a fall, strategies to prevent future falls, and care planning suggestions. Overall Goals of Care е Identify and change underlying risk factors for falls. е Promote activity in a safe manner and in a safe environment. е Recognize commOl1 pathways among falls, incontinence, and functional decline. Fall preven.tion is not an isolated goal but part of a larger objective of promoting physical activity and improved quality of life. Falls CAP Trigger This CAP triggers two groups of persons for specialized follow-up. TRIGGERED INTO THE HIGH RISK OF FUTURE FALLS GROUP, BASED ON PRIOR REPORT OF A MULTIPLE FALLS This group includes about 7% of persons in long-term care facilities, 12% of home care recipients, and 3% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 40% of the persons triggered into this group will fall over a 90-day period. The rate of falls in home care for this same time period tends to be about 65%. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT TRIGGERED INTO THE MEDIUM RISK OF FUTURE FALLS GROUP, BASED ON PRIOR REPORT OF A SINGLE FALL This group includes about 15% of persons in long-term care facilities, 15% of home care recipients, and 10% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 25% of the persons triggered into this group will fall over a 90-day period. The rate of falls in home care for this same time period tends to be about 40% . NOT TRIGGERED No known prior fall. This group includes about 78% of persons in long-term care facilities, 78% of home care recipients, and 83% of older adults living independently in the community. Falls CAP Guidelines General Care Plan Considerations . Have the circumstances of the fall(s) been evaluated? . Has the person been assessed for the contributing causes of the falls? . Has the person been assessed for osteoporosis? ls it correctly managed? . Restraints should be avoided as a fall prevention strategy. They are not associ.ated with a decreased risk of falls or injury associated with falls. The person's right to maintain mobilitty, despite a slightly elevated risk of falling, should be considered. . Does the person need a gait, strength, or balance program? . Has a physician reviewed current medications for their possible effect on falls, including intrinsic contributory factors such as balance, gait, strength, sen.sory perception, and cognition? . ls there a program in place to address blood pressure (especially postural changes) and cardiac problems? Has a physician reviewed issues related to blood pressure? . Has a physician reviewed the possibility of vitamin D deficiency? Assessment and Care Planning Common risk factors for falls, other than a history of prior falls, which is by far the best predictor, are outlined in the following list. Each triggered person will likely have one or more of these risk factors. Modifiable risk factors include . Physical performance limitations: balance, gait, strength, and muscle endur.ance . Visual impairment . Cognitive impairment . Postural hypotension (with tendency to syncope) . Cardiac arrhythmia . Medications (for example, benzodiazepines) . Environmental factors . Low levels of physical activity . Pain from osteoarthritis and other conditions . Diseases, including Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, diabetes, alcoholism, and stroke . Vitamin D deficiency Response to prior fall. A history of falls is the best predictor for future falls. Per.sons who fall are at a higher risk of falling again, often under similar circumstances. This is particularly true for persons who have had multiple falls. Review the history of falls with the person, family, caregivers, and in the medical/clinical record. Usu.ally a I-year look-back period is sufficient for this review. . What were the circumstances of the fall? When did it occur? Night? Day? The exact hour? Did it result in injury? Where did the fall happen? (In the bedroom, bathroom, living room, cor.ridor, on stairs, or outside?) Was it related to taking medications? . Were any changes to the plan of care made after the fall? Are these changes still applicable to the current situation or does the care plan need updating? Does the person have limitations in physical performance (balance, gait, mus.cle strength, and endurance deficits)? Watch for the following indicators of bal.ance problems: sitting, getting up, walking, and turning around. Also, since gait and muscle strength are also related to vitamin D deficiency, this should always be considered. . Does the person have difficulty maintaining a sitting balance? . Does the person need to rock his or her body or push off on the arms of a chair when standing up from a chair? . Does the person have difficulty maintaining a standing position? . Does the person have a gait problem (for example, unsteady gait even if walk.ing with a mobility aid or personal assistance, slow gait, or takes small steps)? . Does one leg appear to be shorter than the other, throwing the person off bal.ance when walking? . Does the person have musculoskeletal problems such as kyphosis (curvature of the spine), weak hip flexors from extended bed rest, or shortening of a leg? . Does the person have a vitamin D deficiency? Care Planning Suggestions for Persons Who Need Assistance When Walking or Who Are Nonambulatory Strategies for improving balance, mobility, and endurance should be incorporated in routine daily activities. е Determine if the person can maintain an upright posture for at least 2 minutes without symptoms of light-headedness. Incorporate into routine activities such as toileting or other daily tasks so that the person is given an opportunity to stand every couple of hours. (continued) (continued) е for the pei:son who is unsteady, but tries to stand up on his or her own, monitor the per.son and take the person to the bathroom regularly. Consider appropriately located grab bars. е Walle for exercise a couple of times a day. Measure distances in the living environment and keep a record of maximum distance walked. Also walk to meals and bathroom as part of the daily routine. е Adjust sitting posture in a chair on a regular basis, especially for the person with a ten.dency to slump do'"'Dс When readjusting. offer U1e person Lhe opportunity to stand and bal.ance, as well as sitting and balancing without leaning on the back of the chair or using arm.rests for support. е Encourage self-propulsion in a wheelchair. Record the distance the person wheeled by him-or herself or with cueing. (To be successful in wheeling the chair, the wheelchair must be a good fit. Make sure thal feet can reach the floor and al least one hand can reach the wheel and the brakes.) The person who can walk with help can increase his or her endurance by wheeling the chair around the living environment using both feet or one leg and one arm. е Involve the person in activity programs that provide exercisefor balance, muscle strengthening, and flexibility. Special interventions for physical performance should be con.sidered following a period of low activity due to illness or other change in status, and follow.ing a fall. е Physicalactivity programs such as those offered at senior centers, YMCAs, community centers, mall walks, taichi, yoga, and dancing programs are potential activities that mayjmprove or maintain balance. Does the person have a visual problem? Visual field deficits, cataracts limiting light perception, and inappropriate eyeglasses are especially common. Review the person's history and assess for the following: . Has the person been assessed for visual problems, and are there any oph.thalmologic diagnoses? ls the care plan up-to-date in terms of medical and environmental treatments for these conditions? ls the person a diabetic? . Does the person wear eyeglasses for reasons other than reading? Have the eyeglasses been assessed recently to assure satisfactory correction? . Does the person neglect (appear not to see) objects on one side of the visual field? . Does poor illumination in the environment affect visual ability? Care Planning Suggestions for Visual Impairment е Ask the person what he or she cansee when looking straight ahead. Know what the person can see in his or her field of vision and place needed objects (for example, mobility aids and dishes) accordingly. е Ask the person about his or herability to differentiatecontrasts and surface textures. Persons wilh visual impairments may have dlfficully detecling changes in levels (for example, stair steps) or the type of surface they are walking on (for example, dry, wet, or icy pavements). Environmental modifications may be useful in some cases (for example, use of tape to mark stair steps). Orientation a11d mobility Lrainil1g may be offered LO support navigation and im.prove awareness of external environmental conditions. е Practice orienting the person to his or her living environment, keeping in mind what he or she can see. Use visual cueing as reminders and for orientation. е Seek advice of occupational therapists for visual cueing. They have special expertise in treating and providing consultation for neglect of one side of the body or one side of the visual field. These impairments normall>1 result from a stroke. е Consider referral to an optometrist or ophthalmologist if the person has not 11-ad an eye examination in the past year. е If new visual problems or perceived changes are identified, refer to a physician or optom.etrist. Does the person have a neurological disease, such as Parkinson's disease, with a tremor or rigidity, or a stroke with one-sided weakness? Does the person have a metabolic disease such as alcoholism or diabetes (hypoglycemia)? Is the person cognitively impaired (one ofthe more important risk factors for falls)? Review the person's history and watch for the following: . Does the person have cognitive performance deficits in memory or everydaydecision making? . Does the person wander? Is the environment safe in which to ambulate? . Does the person consider him-or herself (or appear to consider him-or her.self) able to function at a higher level than he or she is actually capable of? Consider that risky behaviors (standing up alone, getting out of bed alone) are often a result of an unmet need {for example, a need to void). Attending to these needs on a routine basis (for example, by scheduling a toileting plan) may prevent the person from trying risky behaviors. As well, the care pro.vider may need to explore the person's perception and acceptance of his or her physical limitations. . Review the medications the person is taking. Look for those that can affect the person's level of consciousness, cognitive performance, judgment, and sen.sory perception. Care Planning Suggestions for Cognitive Impairment е Build wandering about the living environment into exercise-related activities. Involve the person in purposeful tasks to keep him or her busy and active. е Avoid the onset of behaviors that put the person at risk (for example, address pain, thirst, hunger, and need to toilet). е Keep the person active, mobile, and improve balance. TI1e person with cognitive impair.ment is less able to learn exercises and learn to use assistive devices for mobility, but he or she can improve with practice and repetition. He or she may take a longer period of time or require greater intensity of intervention to improve. He or she may respond well to activities that he or she did in the past Find out what activities he or she liked to do. Medical assessment: Does the person have a problem with blood pressure, an arrhythmia, an especially slow heart beat, or take medictions that may be asso.ciated with falls? . Take heart rate to assess if it is too low or not regular. . Take blood pressures when the person is lying down, sitting up, and stand.ing to detect orthostatic (postural) hypotension (drop in blood pressure with position changes). . Compare blood pressures before breakfast and about 20 minutes after break.fast to evaluate for postprandial (after meal) hypotension. . Is the person taking neuroleptic, anxiolytic, sedative/hypnotic, or antidepres.sant medications? Does he or she take sleeping pills regularly? If so, for how long has the person been taking these medications? Are medications given regularly or PRN? PRN medications may be associated with a higher risk of falls. If neuroleptics are taken, consider a behavior mapping process to check for side effects. . Is the person taking cardiovascular medications, COPD medications, or diuretics that might predispose him or her to hypotension? Care Planning Suggestions for Medical Problems е Routinely help/instruct the person to get up from a bed or chair slowly, allowing for time Lo balance at the edge of the bed or chair. е Consider daily use of support hose. е Encourage the person to avoid large meals (have more frequent small meals) and/or rest after each meal. е Review all medications that can cause blood p,ressure changes. Change medication, dose, or liming of dose as indicated. Is the dose timed to minimize negalive effects? For example, taking a diuretic in the evening may increase frequency of urination at night; getting out of bed at night places the person at greater risk of failing. Consider a morning dose, if possible. Review environmental factors that could precipitate a fall . Look for hazards and make sure that proper assistive devices and spatial and structural features are in place (for example, grab bars). Care Planning Suggestions for Environmental Factors е Assess the environment and provide for -Proper lighting for each time of day or njght -Elimination of glare -Proper height of bed and chairs Proper bars, handrails, and devices in bathroom -No shine floor/carpet, nonskid strips е Check hallways, bedrooms, and bathrooms for obstacles. е People using wheelchairs and walkers need enough space to maneuver safely. A 5-foot (1.5 m) turning radius is considered ideal for most wheelchrur users. е Check for any recent change in the environment (for example, just moved into a new home). If the person has made such a move, has he or she been well oriented to the environment? е Can the person get into the bathroom with an appropriate mobility aid? (Doorways less than 36 inches [90 cm] wide may be a problem.) е Should a commode be used at the bedside at night rather than having the person walk to the bathroom in the dark or when half-asleep? е Is there a need for alternative types of seatinga-chairs or wheelchairs? Assessment by a ther.apist can determine the best seating in accordance with the person's physical condition. е ls the adaptive equipment being used properly? е ls the assistive device in good condition? Sometimes persons use canes, walkers, and wheel.chairs that are not suitable for their size and height. Has the person's status changed, or is there any other reason to believe a new device is needed? -ls the device new to Lhe person? Does the person need additional training in how to use the device, when to use it, and what safety procedures must be taken? Are those helping the person aware of how much help or supervision the person needs? е Check for correct, properly fitted footwear. If in a long-term care or assisted living facility -after a fall, address immedi.ate health concerns and then review the previously listed risk factors to change and improve the care plan. Observations: . Compare the vital signs to the person's usual/baseline pattern; be ready to report prior and current vital signs to the physician. . Prepare an incident report as per facility procedures. . Contact the physician without delay if any of the following are observed: Abnormal vital signs . Suspected dehydration (use BUN/creatinine ratio, if available; otherwise assess for change in urine volume or drinking habits) or infection Change in mental status Change in motor function or speech Inability to resume activity Signs of injury . Medications that might have contributed to the fall Alcohol abuse Care Planning Suggestions after a Fall е Considerchanges in medications, or timing or dosage of medications. е Considerconsults to physical or occupational therapy to assess change in status and plan interventions as needed. е Revise care plaJt to include additionaJ supervision or a supervised program to help the person resume previous activity levels. Take into consideration building confidence, modi.fications in response to potential problems associated with the fall, and any new adaptations due to injuries suffered in the fall. . If none of the previously listed conditions are present, continue evaluating the circumstances of the fall. Use a consulting pharmacist as a resource in this evaluation, as necessary. Review the person's medications, focusing especially on new medication(s), drug dosages, or new combinations of drugs. Review the length of time from the change to the onset of symptoms. Review results of any laboratory tests with the physician. Ask the person to describe how the fall occurred. Evaluate the person for a need to avoid a decline in function secondary to a fall. Injuries, low activity because of illness, or fear of future falls may all contribute to a decline in function. [Review ADL CAP.] Additional Resources American Geriatrics Society, British Geriatrics Society, and American Acad.emy of Orthopedic Surgeons. 2001. Panel on fall prevention: Guideline for the prevention of falls in older persons JAGS 49: 664-72. Note: These compre.hensive clinical practice guidelines are the most up-to-date in print and are the results of a collaborative effort between the American Geriatrics Society, the Brit.ish Geriatrics Society, and the American Association of Orthopedic Surgeons. American Medical Directors Association. 2003. Clinical practice guidelines: Falls and fall risk, 2d ed. Columbia, MD: AMDA. American Medical Directors Association. 2004. Clinical practice guidelines: Osteoporosis, falls and fall risk. Slide presentation in-service. www.amda.com Lipsitz LA, Burrows A, Kiel D, Kelley-Gagnon M. 1997. Falls. Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter walks the reader through a step-by-step approach to assessment of persons at risk for falling and provides numerous care planning suggestions. MacRae PG, Asplund LA, Schnelle JF, Ouslander JG, Abrahase A, Morris C. 1996. A walking program for nursing home persons: Effects on walk endurance, physical activity, mobility, and quality of life.JAGS 44: 175-80. Ray WA, Taylor JA, Meador KG, Thapa PB, Brown AK, Kajihara HK, Davis C, Gideon P, Griffin MR. 1997. A randomized trial of a consultation service to reduce falls in nursing homes. JAMA 278: 557-62. Schnelle JF, MacRae PG, Ouslander JG, Simmons SF, Nitta M. 1995. Functional incidental training, mobility performance, and incontinence care with nursing home persons. JAGS 43: 1356-60. Tinetti ME, Gordon C, Sogolow E, Lapin P, Bradley EH. 2006. Fall-risk evalu.ation and management: Challenges in adopting geriatric care practices. The Gerontologist 46: 717-25. Authors Katherine Berg, PhD, PT Lewis A. Lipsitz, MD Palmi V. Jonsson, MD Margaret Kelley-Gagnon, RN Beryl D. Goldman, PhD, RN Katharine M. Murphy, PhD, RN John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Katarzyna Szczerbinska, MD, PhD Knight Steel, MD Section 17 Pain CAP Problem Pain is defined as "an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage. It is a subjective experience, and "the inability to communicate verbally does not negate the possibility that an individual is experi.encing pain and is in need of appropriate pain-relieving treatment" (International Association for the Study of Pain -IASP). Pain can be affected by damage to various physiologic systems and tissues, including musculoskeletal (for example, arthritis, fractures, injury from peripheral vascular disease, wounds), neurological (for example, diabetic neuropathy, herpes zoster), and cancer. The intensity (severity) of the pain is a subjective matter and is not necessarily proportional to the type or extent of tissue or system damage. Among the relevant issues assessed in the Pain CAP are the newness of the pain, the intensity of the pain, the nature of current treatments, and the extent to which self-reported pain is hindered by cognitive or communication deficits. The presence of pain can also increase suffering in other areas, leading to an increased sense of helplessness, anxiety, depression, decreased activity, decreased appetite, and disrupted sleep. Management of pain thus extends beyond analgesia to include other interventions and treatments focusing on the person's quality of life and ability to function. Pain must be managed in a timely fashion, especially if it is of recent onset. Pain management should involve an interdisciplinary approach, working with the per.son and his or her family or caregiver. Additionally, to be effective, the informal caregivers and the person must communicate the signs and symptoms of pain in a timely manner to the physician and other members of the care team. Overall Goals of Care е Identify and treat underlying reasons for pain. е Optimize the ability to perform activities of daiEy living and to live an active social life. е Relieve suffering. е Monitor treatment efficacy and adverse effects. е Recognize the association of pain and olher issues, such as depression, withdrawal, and func.tional decline. Pain management should be viewed as part of a larger objective promoting physical activity and quality of life. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Pain CAP Trigger This CAP applies to long-term care, home care, assisted living, post-acute care, and community health assessment. The goal of this CAP is to assess and manage pain and the problems it causes in a timely fashion. This CAP triggers two groups of persons for specialized follow-up, based on the severity of the reported pain rather than the likelihood of curing the pain. In fact, it is relatively uncommon that a person in either triggered group will be fully cured. Thus, the key goal of this CAP is to improve the person's general status. HIGH RISK TRIGGER A person with severe, horrible, or excruciating pain (whether the pain occurs daily or less frequently). This group includes about 5% of persons in long-term care facili.ties, 25% of home care recipients, and 4% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 45% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period, and 15% will become pain free. The rate of improvement in home care is about 15%, while the proportion becom.ing pain free is only about 5%. MEDIUM RISK TRIGGER A person with daily pain described as mild or moderate. This group includes about 12% of persons in long-term care facilities, 25% of home care recipients, and 15% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility set.ting, about 35% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period, and 15% will become pain free. The rate of improvement in home care is about 14%, while the proportion becoming pain free again is about 7%. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. Pain CAP Guidelines Further Assessment of Pain Pain frequency and intensity. To manage pain, a thorough assessment includes the following: 1. taking a detailed history of pain intensity, location, frequency, and character.istics; 2. completing an accurate physical examination; 3. carrying out proper laboratory studies; 4. deciding the extent to which the pain affects emotional status and preferences; 5. observing the performance of the person; and 6. reviewing present interventions and assessing their efficacy and side effects, if any. Additional considerations in assessing pain: . Do not assume that changes in pain patterns or new pain are caused by pre.existing conditions. A new, thorough evaluation should be carried out each time there is new pain or a change in the pattern of existing pain. . As pain is common in older adults and persons living with chronic illness, pain should be treated as the fifth vital sign and, as such, monitored on a regu.lar and scheduled basis. . After the assessment with an interRAl instrument, follow up by asking the person to grade the pain severity using a supplemental pain assessment tool the person finds easy to use (examples are provided in the text that follows). Include the person's estimate of pain intensity at its lowest and highest levels. Questions should be simple and concrete, and the person's statements about pain should be taken at face value. If the person does not understand, use simpler or different words. Use the interRAI pain questions regularly, as well as any supplemental tools, to check pain symptoms over time. Record find.ings on a pain flow sheet to assess the efficacy of interventions. Examples of supplemental pain assessment tools include the visual analog scale (person places a mark on a 10 cm line in accordance to severity); a numerical rating scale (how bad the pain is on a scale of 0, no pain, to 10, worst possible pain); the verbal descriptive scale (mild, moderate, severe, horrible, excruciating); and the faces pain scale (showing faces from a smiling one to a face in extreme agony). There are also specialized pain assessment tools for persons with dif.ficulties in verbalization. . For persons on an analgesic, a routine pain reassessment is recommended. This will help you titrate the analgesic as necessary. Observefrequency and intensity of pain. To manage pain adequately, continuing observation of the person's performance is important. If the person cannot com.municate verbally, lacks the ability to describe symptoms, or tends not to complain, observation is the only way to assess pain. You should be sensitive to cultural factors that may affect the manifestation of pain. For some cultural groups, a tendency toward stoicism may hinder the person's willingness to express pain. On the other hand, there may be a tendency for staff or informal caregivers to inappropriately discount pain indicators among persons who are more expressive about health concerns than expected based on cultural norms. Use observations during usual activities (for example, morning care, physical therapy) to establish or confirm the person's pain complaints/signs of pain, and correlate this with changes in physical functioning. Speak with those providing direct care, including family members, and document the observations of these individuals. Nonverbal signs of pain: . facial expressions (for example, frowning, grimacing) . vocal behaviors (for example, sighing, moaning) . body position (for example, guarding, distorted posture, restricted limb move.ment, increased resting) . change in routine (for example, staying in bed, less or slowed involvement in activities of daily living, decreased intake of food and fluids) . change in mental status (for example, irritability, confusion) . signs of aggression Determine pain location, type, and response to external conditions. Determine as precisely as possible where the person feels pain. Where the pain is located can be of importance when the care plan is developed (for example, pain related to peripheral vascular disease or arthritis will affect the care planning interventions). . Find out if the pain is constant, changes over time, or comes and goes (inter.mittent). If intermittent, ask about its frequency, duration, and the circum.stances in which it occurrs. The person's pain experience may vary by site, time of day, and activity. . Ask the person to describe what the pain feels like. Ask: "What words best describe it?" Descriptions may be helpful in guiding therapy and in finding out whether the pain is more likely neuropathic (burning, pins and needles, shooting, numbness), musculoskeletal (cramping, crushing, throbbing, stab.bing), or visceral (cramping, tightness). . Ask what makes the pain better or worse (for example, moving, sitting still, staying in the same position, following medication administration, maintain.ing drug schedule, taking medication as pain arises). Has the pain subsided as hoped following the implementation of a planned analgesic drug program? Note what behavior seems to relieve the pain and what makes it worse. All information from this discussion must be correlated to findings from the physi.cal examination and proper laboratory data. Assess treatment preferences. Discuss treatment choices with the person (and family as appropriate) and ask about preferences and expectations. Respecting pref.erences promotes adherence to a regimen and achievement of therapeutic goals. For example, it is not uncommon for terminally ill persons, preparing for end oflife, to prefer experiencing some pain rather than taking doses of medication that result in a diminished level of alertness. Management of Pain Pharmacological Intervention Consider whether the person prefers to be (or should be) referred to a pain clinic or pain outreach team. The treating physician usually prescribes a drugtherapy after identifying new pain or an acute flare-up of chronic pain. A person may be in daily pain for long periods without a drug regimen being prescribed, but this must not be permitted to occur. Before starting a new medication, identify and review all medications the person is taking, including over-the-counter medica.tions, alternative medications, and herbal remedies. It is also important to set a specific pain improvement goal, responding to the person's desired comfort level within a specified time period. The physician does not always have the same opportunity as other clinical staff (for example, nurses) or family members to monitor the results of the intervention on the person's everyday life. Therefore, the nurses and family members are in a key position to interview the person and observe the impact of new medications. The person and the nearest caregivers should be aware of what pain medication has been started and the strength of its effect (where it stands on the analgesic ladder introduced by the World Health Organization [WHO]; (see box on next page), how soon the medication can be expected to show its effect, and what adverse effects to monitor. [See Appropriate Medications CAP.] Drug therapy is a mainstay for managing pain. Adhere to these basic concepts of treatment: . By mouth is the most convenient and cost-effective route of administration. . By the clock involves around-the-clock administration, rather than as needed, and allows each analgesic dose to achieve constant pain control. However, for control of severe pain, self-administered pain medication (for example, a patient-controlled morphine pump) often results in more acceptable levels of pain control with lower use of the analgesic. . By the ladder administration is modified from the WHO Three-Step Analge.sic Ladder (see box on next page). Note that in addition to traditional anal.gesic medications, several other types of pharmaceuticals have pain-relieving effects. Consider consulting the physician about how to improve pain man.agement by elevating the pain threshold (that is, the point at which a person is uncomfortable with his or her pain) with the use of antidepressants or manag.ing neuropathic pain. . Choose the best single analgesic for the person, then titrate the dose up or down as necessary. Side effects are easier to identify if only one drug is initially provided. At the same time, choosing the single best analgesic may be quite difficult. Many pharmaceutical agents are now being co-formulated to better control pain (the key for breakthrough pain is to prescribe very rapidly avail.able substances). . Increase the drug dose or strength (in the case of opioids) when there is inad.equate pain control. Often, an additional one-third of the present dose of opi.oid is added to control breakthrough pain. . Prevent and treat analgesic side effects. Precautions must be taken with some medications to control unwanted side effects (WHO Ladder -see box). Side effects are more likely to occur in older and frailer persons with adverse effects often arising from changes in the central nervous system (for example, delirium, restlessness, sleepiness). Other common symptoms are gastrointes.tinal (for example, nausea, vomiting, stomach irritation, constipation). Adapted from the WHO LADDER for Chronic Pain For mild to moderate pain: Step 1: "nonopioids": ParacetamoVAcetaminophen, aspirin, or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs -Note: While this is ln the WHO approach, many geriatric pain experts might take NSAIDs off this list considering their potential for side effects, including GI, renal, deliri.um); start ulcer prophylaxis. If moderate pain remains unrelieved by Step 1 drugs: Step 2: "weak" opioids; start laxatives (unless contr.aindicated). For moderate to severe pain wuelieved by Step 2 drugs: Step 3: "strong" opioids; sta1сt laxatives (unless contraindicated), consider medications for nausea, if needed. Note: The distinction between weak and strong opioids, although still widely used, is not state of the art. Strong opioids at Step 3 are now commonly classified as Step 2 level agents, exactly as the "weak" opioids, because they are co-formulated at very low dosages with other agents. Nonpharmacological Intervention Nonpharmacological approaches are important in pain management because they . may augment the efficacy of medications . usually have minimal adverse effects . give the person and family a sense of participation and control . may address functional decline, mood, and social isolation Educate the person, family, and direct care staff. . Dispel myths that pain and disability are normal parts of aging. . Discuss the cause of the pain, pain assessment findings, goals of treatment, multidisciplinary plan of care, prognosis, treatment options, and side effects. 