Consider the following approaches: . Physical, occupational, and other therapies to help with safety assessment (for example, falls, injuries), immobilization of a joint, strength and endurance training, and other pain management techniques. . Physical modalities (for example, heat, ice, or massage). . Relaxation and distraction techniques (for example, individual, group, or one.on-one activities, such as meditation, music, conversation, or audio books). . Other options include acupuncture, tai chi, and other complementary therapies. . Help the person set realistic and concrete goals (for example, walk 100 feet, go to an activity three times a week). . Consider whether the person needs added psychological and social support. Prevention of Unwanted Consequences of Pain . Special attention should be paid to the relationship between pain and func.tional capacity. [See ADL CAP.] . Special attention should be given to the relationship between pain and depression. Persons in clhronic pain tend to develop depression, and therefore they should always be assessed for depression. [See Mood CAP, specifically Depression Rating Scale, and remember that the relationship between pain and depression is bi-directional.] . Active management of underlying and accompanying diseases. . To prevent other negative consequences of pain, see Behavior CAP and Social Relationship CAP. Additional Resources American Geriatric Society Panel on Chronic Pain in Older Persons. 1998. The management of chronic pain in older persons.JAGS 46(5): 635-51. Bair MJ, Robinson RL, Katon W, Kroenke K. 2003. Depression and pain comor.bidity. Arch Intern Med 163: 2433-45. Bernabei R, Gambassi G, Lapane K, et al.1998. Management of pain in elderly persons with cancer. JAMA279(23): 1877-82. Note: This paper describes the prevalence and predictors of daily cancer pain and analgesic treatment using MDS pain and drug data from five states. Findings: 26% of persons in pain received no treatment; others were inadequately treated, especially older and minority persons. Farrell MJ, Katz B, Helme RD. 1996. The impact of dementia on the pain experi.ence. Pain 67: 7-15. Finne-Soveri UH, Ljunggren G, Schroll M, Jonsson PV, Hjaltadottir I, El Kholy K, Tilvis RS. 2000. Pain and its association with disability in the institu.tional long-term care in four Nordic countries. The Canadian Journal on Aging(Suppl 2) 19: S38-49. Scherder E, Oosterman J, Swaab D, Herr K, Ooms M, Ribbe M, Sergeant J, Pickering G, Benedetti F. 2005. Recent developments in pain in dementia. BMJ 330: 461-64. Stolee P, Hillier LM, Esbaugh J, Bol McKellar L, Gauthier N. 2005. Instruments for the assessment of pain in older persons with cognitive impairment. JAGS 53: 319-26. Zyxzkowsa J, Szczerbinska K, Jantzi MR, Hirdes JP. 2007. Pain among the old.est old in community and institutions. Pain 129(1-2): 167-76. Epub 2007, January 23. Clinical Practice Guidelines, Manuals, and Web Sites American Pain Society. A multidisciplinary educational and scientific organiza.tion serving people in pain by advancing research, education, treatment, and professional practice. www.ampainsoc.org City of Hope Pain Resource Center. Serves as a clearinghouse to disseminate resources to help institutions improve pain management. Over 300 materials can be found on this site. http:/ /prc.coh.org Griffie J, Matson S, Muchka S, Weissman D. 1998. Improving pain in the long.term care setting: A resource guide for institutional change. Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI. Division of Hematology/Oncology, 9200 W. Wisconsin Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53226. (414) 805-4605. Griffie J, Muchka S, Weissman D. 2000. Nursing staff education resource manual: Pain management 101: A six session in-service education program in pain management for long-term care facilities. Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI. Division of Hematology/Oncology, 9200 W. Wisconsin Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53226. (414) 805-4605. International Association for the Study of Pain: www.iasp-pain.org McCaffery M, Pasero C. 1999. Pain: Clinical manual. St. Louis, MO: C.V. Mosby. Palliative Medicine Program at the Medical College of Wisconsin. Develops, implements, and disseminates innovative educational and clinical care pro.grams. This Web site offers resource materials, analgesic guidelines, and infor.mation on institutional pain management. www.mcw.edu/pallmed Rochon T, Patry G, DeSilva D. 2001. Pain reliefresource manual. Brown Univer.sity Center for Gerontology and Health Care Research, Providence, RI. (401) 863-9628. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1992. Clinical practice guide.lines: Acute pain management. (AHCPR Publication No. 92-0032). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (Also available online at www.nlm.nih.gov) U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1994. Clinical practice guide.lines: Management ofcancerpain. (AH CPR Publication No. 94-0592). Wash.ington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (Also available online at www.nlm.nih.gov) Authors AidaeWon,MD Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD Dinnus Frijters, PhD Giovanni Gambassi, MD Katharine M. Murphy, PhD, RN John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 18 Pressure Ulcer CAP Problem A pressure ulcer is defined as a localized injury to the skin and/or underlying tissue usually over a bony prominence, as a result of pressure, or pressure in combina.tion with shear and/or friction (from www.npuap.org). A number of contributing or confounding factors are also associated with pressure ulcers; the significance of these factors is yet to be elucidated. Pressure ulcers occur because of pressure over a localized area of skin. They can be limited to the skin or they may involve deep tissues including the underlying bone. They are graded (or described) according to depth. Often they are found over a bony prominence, especially the sacrum and the greater trochanter (upper part of the femur). If a pressure ulcer is not present, the goal is to prevent one from occurring. If a pressure ulcer is present, the goal is to heal or close it. Unfortunately, these goals cannot always be accomplished. Nevertheless, every effort should be made to do so. The higher the pressure ulcer descriptive stage, the more severe and the longer the recovery period is likely to be. Healing may be protracted, labor-intensive, and expensive. The following staging (or grading) system is used widely to describe the severity of skin breakdown. . Stage 1: An observable pressure-related change of intact skin that may include changes in one or more of the following: skin temperature (warmth or cool.ness), tissue consistency (firm or boggy feel), or sensation {pain, itching). The ulcer appears as a defined area of persistent redness in lightly pigmented skin, whereas in darker skins, the ulcer may appear with persistent red, blue, or purple hues, or its color may simply differ from the surrounding area. . Stage 2: Partial skin loss involving epidermis, dermis, or both. The ulcer is superficial and presents clinically as an abrasion, open blister, or shallow cra.ter. . Stage 3: Full thickness skin loss involving damage or necrosis (death of cells) of subcutaneous tissue that may extend down to, but not through, underlying fascia. Bone, tendon, or muscle are not exposed. The ulcer presents clinically as a deep crater with or without undermining of adjacent tissue. . Stage 4: Full thickness skin loss with extensive tissue necrosis or damage to muscle, bone, or supporting structures (for example, tendon, joint capsule). Undermining and sinus tracts also may be associated with stage 4 ulcers. . Stage undetermined (for new suite of interRAI tools only): Unstageable often as ulcer is covered with necrotic tissue. Some of the negative outcomes of pressure ulcers are pain and suffering, increased risk for infections or infecting others, and mortality. A person with a pressure ulcer has three times the mortality risk of a person without an ulcer. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Overall Goals of Care е Prevent pressure ulcers from occurring. е Optimize Lhe local wound or skin environmenl, allowing the ulcer lo close. е Achieve a dean ulcer base with granulation tissue. е Maintain a moist local skin environment to allow granulation to take place. е Check the progress of pressure ulcer healing. е Prevent the development of more severe or new pressure ulcers. е Check skin regularly for signs of emetging pressure ulcers. Pressure Ulcer CAP Trigger This CAP trigger identifies three subgroups of persons for specialized follow-up.The specialized follow-up seeks to heal either an existing pressure ulcer or to pre.vent pressure ulcers from occurring. Specialized follow-up may include consulta.tion with a practitioner (physician, wound care specialist, or nurse) with expertise in ulcer/wound care. TRIGGERED -HAS A STAGE 2 OR HIGHER LEVEL PRESSURE ULCER AND THE GOAL OF CARE IS HEALING The proportion of persons with such a pressure ulcer in any service program in part depends on the vigilance of the caregivers (staff) in preventing pressure ulcers. In long-term care facilities tthe range can be wide, with some facilities having few persons with a stage 2 or higher pressure ulcer, and others having many persons with this condition. On average, about 10% of persons in long-term care facilities fall into this category, including those who entered the facility with an ulcer. In a home care program, 2 to 8% of persons will have a stage 2 or higher stage pressure ulcer. Among older adults living independently in the community, this condition is uncommon. Care outcomes. Over a 90-day period, about 60% of persons in long-term care facilities with a stage 2 or higher pressure ulcer will improve, while about 45% of home care recipients will improve. TRIGGERED -DOES NOT HAVE A STAGE 2 OR HIGHER PRESSURE ULCER BUT IS AT RISK OF DEVELOPING SUCH AN ULCER Two subgroups of persons fall into this category. TRIGGERED -HAS A STAGE 1 PRESSURE ULCER Over a 90-day period, the proportion of persons who will progress to a stage 2, or higher, pressure ulcer varies by the type of program the person is in. About 4% of persons in long-term care facilities and about the same percentage of home care recipients fall into this group. Less commonly, older adults living independently in the community fall into this group. Care outcomes.In long-term care facilities, about 15% of those triggered into this group will progress to having a stage 2 or higher pressure ulcer over the next 90 days; in a home care program, about 7% will so decline. At the same time, many more of those with a stage 1 pressure ulcer will have no pressure ulcer 90 days later -about 67% of persons in long-term care facilities and 45% of home care recipients. TRIGGERED -DOES NOT HAVE A PRESSURE ULCER BUT HAS THE FOLLOWING RISK FACTORS Dependent, or activity did not occur in either bed mobility or transfer, andhas one or more of the following risk factors present: has a history of pressure ulcers, has an indwelling catheter, has a stasis ulcer, or is receiving wound care. About 4% of persons in long-term care facilities, 3% of home care recipients, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community fall into this risk group. Care outcomes. About 15% of persons in long-term care facilities and 10% of home care recipients with the above risk factors will develop a pressure ulcer over the fol.lowing 90-day period. NOT TRIGGERED Has no pressure ulcer or pressure ulcer risk factors. This subgroup includes 82% of persons in long-term care facilities, 90% of home care recipients, and 99% of older adults living independently in the community. Pressure Ulcer CAP Guidelines Ulcer Management For all ulcers present at admission into a program, document the following: location, size, stage, presence and type of drainage, presence of odors, and descrip.tion of the surrounding skin. ]f possible, take a picture of the ulcer. Is an eschar (blackened devitalized tissue) present? Is yellow tissue (slough) present? . A physician or wound care specialist consultation is needed to determine how (and by whom and where) to remove this tissue or if it should be removed. Debridement choices to remove the damaged and dead tissue include surgical and chemical means. Does the wound bed seem infected? . If there is reason to believe the ulcer is infected (such as the presence of a foul odor, increasing pain, surrounding skin is reddened [erythema] or warm, or there is a presence of pus) treatment options to be considered by the physician or wound care specialist include Topical or systemic antibiotics Debridement In chronic wounds, silver impregnated dressings may be a better choice given the increased incidence of antibiotic resistant organisms. Is granulation tissue present (a beefy red tissue resulting from new capillary formation and fibroblasts)? This is essential for healing to occur. . View the wound at the time any wound care product is applied and note whether granulation tissue is present and the wound is healing as expected. If the condition of the wound bed begins to decline, a physician or wound care expert consultation is needed. . Once granulation tissue is present, the goal is to maintain a clean, moist envi.ronment. Some products that may be helpful include Polymer films and foams Hydrogels Hydrocolloids Alginates or absorptive beads Combination products Silver impregnated products . Document the depth of the ulcer and measure it at least weekly. Record the presence of granulation tissue, slough, eschar, or signs of an infection. Employ a progress monitoring tool. If the ulcer does not show signs of healing, despite therapy, consider compli.cating factors. . Is there an elevated bacterial level in the absence of clinical infection? Is exu.date present, necrotic debris or slough in the wound, too much granulation tissue, or odor in the wound bed? Expert consultation should be considered if these conditions are present. . Is there an underlying osteomyelitis (bone infection)? Additional diagnostic studies may be needed. . Are there co-morbid conditions or illnesses? Many acute and chronic condi.tions, such as diabetes mellitus, a malignancy, or the use of steroids, may make healing difficult. . Is the person terminally ill? Consider changing treatment goals to comfort measures. . Has a turning schedule been implemented? This should remove pressure from the wound but should also minimize pressure on areas at risk. . Does the person need a pressure relieving or reducing mattress? Consultation may be needed for the appropriate surface. . Have nutritional deficits been addressed? Although data on the efficacy are limited, consider vitamins and minerals (for example, zinc and vitamin C) supplementation. [See Undernutrition CAP.] . Is protein intake sufficient for healing? Generally about 1.25 grams of protein per kg of body weight is recommended ifthere are no contraindications to this diet. Has a dietitian been consulted? [See Undernutrition CAP.] . Is pain present when dressings are changed? Evaluate for underlying infection and bone or tissue involvement. [See Pain CAP.] . Is the person depressed or frustrated by the ulcer? Consider counseling, if appropriate, to the person and/or family/caregivers regarding the treatment plan and its potentially protracted course. [See Mood CAP.] For those at risk of developing pressure ulcers, treat as follows: Evaluate for extrinsic risk factors. . Pressure Can the person move sufficiently to relieve pressure over any one site? If not, must a caregiver move the person? Is the person confined to a bed or chair all or most of the time? Is the mattress or seat cushion appropriate to reduce or relieve pressure? Can a special pressure relieving mattress or chair cushion be provided? If the person cannot move independently, is a regular (for example, every 2 hours) turning schedule provided? Ensure that the person and family understand the need to monitor pres.sure points. . Friction and shearing forces Is the person sliding down in the bed? Is the person who needs help with bed mobility or transfer moved by slid.ing rather than lifting? . Maceration (destruction of skin because of excess moisture) Is the person persistently wet, especially from fecal incontinence, wound drainage, or perspiration? Evaluate for intrinsic risk factors. . Altered mental status Is delirium limiting mobility? [See Delirium CAP.] Is cognitive loss limiting mobility? [See Cognitive Loss CAP.] Address the underlying cause(s) of mental status changes to the extent pos.sible. . Immobility (person is unable to change position) Is it because of a condition such as a stroke, multiple sclerosis, or hipfracture? Has physical or occupational therapy been maximized? Is immobility due to other causes? е Physical restraints should always be removed unless the person is at seri.ous risk of self-injury or injury to others and no other means of control is possible. [See Physical Restraints CAP.] е Consider reducing the dose of or stopping medications that limit mobil.ity (for example, psychotropics, opioids). Review all medications with the physician (or the nurse-practitioner or physician assistant) and con.sulting pharmacist. [See Medication CAP.] . Incontinence: Fecal incontinence may be associated with pressure ulcer for.mation. [See Bowel CAP.] Has a scheduled toileting program been tried? . Poor nutrition [See Undernutrition CAP.] . Have additional disease states, for example, peripheral vascular disease, dia.betes mellitus, and any cause of decreased sensation been discussed with the physician or appropriate health care provider? . Inactivity What is limiting the person's degree of physical activity? Additional Resources Baranoski S, Ayello EA. 2003. Wound care essentials: Practice principals. Spring.house, PA: Springhouse. Note: A practical guide to wound care, especially pressure ulcers. Bergstrom N, Bennett MA, Carlson CE, et al. 1994. Treatment of pressure ulcers. Clinical practice guideline, no. 15. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. AHCPR Publication No. 95-0652. Note:Extensive litera.ture review and grading of the evidence regarding treatment. Brandeis GH, Powell JW. 1997. Pressure ulcers. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Mur.phy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 303-14. Note:This chapter provides an overview of pressure ulcers with emphasis for the nursing home person. European Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (EPUAP): www.epuap.org Folkedahl BA,Frantz RA, Goode C. 2002. Treatment ofpressure ulcers: Research-based protocol. The University of Iowa, Gerontological Nursing Inter.ventions Research, Research Dissemination Care. Note: This protocol provides helpful information for assessing and monitoring pressure ulcers and risk fac.tors for development. www.nursing.uiowa.edu Hess CT. 2004. Clinical guide: Wound care. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins. Note: A practical guide to wound care, especially pressure ulcers. National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel.Pressure Ulcer Scale for Heal.ing (PUSH) Tool version 3.0. 9/15/98. Note: The PUSH tool is copyright by NUPAP. www.npuap.org National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel. Supplementary Surface Standards, Terms and Definitions 8/29/2006. lnternet address: www.npuap.org Reddy, R, Sudeeo, SG, Rochon, PA. 2006. Preventing pressure ulcers: A system.atic review. JAMA 296:974-84. Registered Nurses Association ofOntario (RNAO). 2002. Assessment and management of stage I to IV pressure ulcers. (August) 104 pp. (70 references]. Thomas DR. 1997. Pressure ulcers. In Cassel CK, Cohen HJ, Larson EB, et al., eds. Geriatric medicine, 3d ed. New York: Springer. 767-84. Note: General review of the subject of pressure ulcers. Authors Gary H. Brandeis, MD Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Sue Nonemaker, RN, MS Knight Steel, MD Pauline Belleville-Taylor, RN, MS, CS Section 19 Cardiorespiratory Conditions CAP Problem The Cardiorespiratory Conditions CAP alerts the health care professional to the need to assess and manage the person for possible cardiovascular or respiratory problems. Many, but not all, adults who have cardiorespiratory difficulties will already be under the care of a physician. In addition, some persons may develop new symptoms or an exacerbation of old symptoms that require medical or other intervention. The prevalence of heart disease increases rapidly with age. In Western societies, 75% of all persons with heart failure are 60 years of age or older, and 20% or more of persons 75 years of age or older have a history of a heart attack or angina. Many older persons with hypertension may develop symptoms from an abrupt change in blood pressure or a new medication. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is widespread especially in those who have smoked or who have worked in certain industries. Some signs and symptoms, such as shortness of breath or chest pain associated with exertion, may be clearly attributable to the cardiorespiratory systems. How.ever, in some cases such as general fatigue, the relationship to the cardiorespiratory systems may not be immediately apparent. Furthermore, signs and symptoms of acute illness, such as pneumonia, may be difficult to recognize in the presence of a chronic condition such as COPD. All such problems can severely restrict a person's lifestyle and should be monitored and addressed. Overall Goals of Care е Help nonphysicians working with older adults in the community identify potential cardiovas.cular or respiratory S}'mptoms. е Refer to a physician and other health professionals those who exhibit signs and symptoms of cardiovascular or respiratory difficulties and are not already under active care. Cardiorespiratory Conditions CAP Triggers Cardiovascular and respiratory disease in older adults may or may not be under treatment and the person may or may not have participated in cardiopulmonary self-management or other intervention programs. Limitation in functioning may not be recognized as being due to cardiorespiratory disease or may be attributed to the onset of old age. Many symptoms, such as shortness of breath, may be accepted and tolerated. Thus, this CAP identifies whether the symptom is present without first excluding those who may already be under a physician's care. TRIGGERED Persons who display any of the following symptoms: . Chestpain . Shortness of breath . Irregular pulse . Dizziness . Presence of any of the following test results. (These items do not appear on the interRAI assessment forms and are available only if you or the physician ordered or completed the test. Also, they should not be taken as normal limits.) еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Systolic blood pressure > 200 or < 100 mmHG Respiratory rate > 20 per minute Heart rate > 100 or < 50 per minute Oxygen saturation < 94% This triggered group includes 15% of persons in long-term care facilities, about 40% of persons receiving home care (9% with chest pain, 25% with shortness of breath, 15% with irregular pulse, and! 20% with dizziness), and 35% of older adults living independently in the community (4% with chest pain, 15% with shortness of breath, 10% with irregular pulse, and 20% with dizziness). NOT TRIGGERED Persons who do not have any of the previously mentioned symptoms. Cardiorespiratory Conditions CAP Guide-lines It is important to ensure that cardiorespiratory symptoms are evaluated. Many per.sons with such symptoms will require urgent attention, and there are many thera.peutic options to treat these conditions, depending on the cause of the symptoms. Heart failure, for example, usually responds to treatment for a considerable period of time, leading to an improved quality of life in terms of exercise tolerance and degree of fatigue. In addition, some symptoms may not be immediately recognized as resulting from cardiovascular disease. For example, light-headedness, dizziness, or blackouts (syncope), often related to a drop in blood pressure, may also be the result of abnormalities of a heart valve or an arrhythmia, both of which may be amenable to medical orsurgical intervention. Frequently, persons may have both cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses. The principal symptoms and signs associated with cardiovascular and respiratory dis.ease are as follows: . Cardiovascular disease -Shortnessof breath (dyspnea), chest pain, palpita.tions, swelling of the lower extremities, light-headedness, dizziness, blackouts (syncope). . Respiratory disease -Shortness of breath, cough, sputum production, coughing up blood, wheezing, and chest pain. Sometimes persons simply say that "they cannot get enough air:' To determine the cause of one of these symptoms or signs, a thorough medical examination is required. When present, ask the person whether a physician is aware of the problem and whether the person is under treatment for the condition. Regardless of the answer, suggest that the presence of these symptoms warrants further discussion with the physician. The following material provides further information on these symptoms. It is provided to assist the clinician in discussing the problem with the person. But remember, the principal goal is to convince the person to see a physician. Irregular pulse. A new irregular pulse always requires evaluation. If, for example, it is a reflection of atrial fibrillation, the person has an increased risk of stroke. How.ever, this is just one of many causes of an irregular pulse. Cough, sputum production, and wheezing. Cough, with or without sputum pro.duction, is initiated when the lining of the respiratory tract is irritated and is byfar the most common respiratory symptom. Cough is commonly caused by upperrespiratory infections of a viral nature. Sputum associated with infection, especially of a bacterial nature, often is colored and thick and viscous. Brown, pink, or dark coloration may be due to blood. Bloody sputum may result from an acute infection, a chronic one (for example, tuberculosis), a tumor, blood clots in the lungs, and a lengthy list of other conditions that always require medical evaluation. In addi.tion, cough may be caused by a medication, most commonly one recommended for the treatment of hypertension or congestive heart failure. Nearly all heavy smok.ers have a chronic cough. Other causes include pneumonia, bronchitis, conges.tive heart failure (CHF), mild asthma, and, rarely, tumors. People with asthma or chronic lung disease, such as emphysema, may also complain of wheezing, which is a sense of difficulty moving air, especially on breathing out, often associated with an audible sound.If new in onset or severe, it requires urgent medical attention. Similarly an increase in sputum production or a change in the character of the sputum needs to be evaluated by a physician. Chest pain. Chest pain always requires a thorough medical evaluation. The cause often, but not always, may be able to be determined by a detailed history and physi.cal examination. Usually,however, one or more blood tests and perhaps a radiologic study or even an endoscopic study as well as an electrocardiogram are needed to confirm the diagnosis. The typical pain of heart (ischemic) disease is a squeezing, gripping pain. It is often felt in the center of the chest, but may be noted in the throat, one or both arms, the jaw and lower teeth, or even the back. The pain may be associated with exertion or palpitations and may reoccur under similar circumstances. When mild it may barely benoticed or incorrectly attributed to indigestion. It may persist or it may be transient. There are many other causes of chest pain that may be confused with pain originating in the heart, including esophageal disease, a chest infection, a pulmonary embolism (blood clot lodging in the lung), dissection of the aorta (tear.ing of the wall of this artery), and arthritis in the neck or back. Chest pain therefore requires an immediate medical evaluation. It is of particular concern when new in onset or when becoming worse, increasing in frequency, occurring at rest, of prolonged duration (longer than 10 minutes), or when it is associated with other symptoms or signs such as light-headedness or difficulty breathing. Syncope or blackout. Sudden collapse with loss of consciousness and spontaneous recovery (fainting or syncope) often is caused by a cardiovascular problem, such as a heart attack or an arrhythmia. Other common causes include a drop in blood pressure (hypotension) associated with blood loss, dehydration, a postural change, medications or a change in a medication, a cardiovascular reflex after coughing or a bowel movement, or after eating a meal. Episodes of dizziness or light-headedness or a syncopal episode always require referral to a physician. Suspect dehydration if the person is on a diuretic or has reduced his or her fluid intake. Edema (swelling) of the ankles or legs. Swelling of the ankles or legs that can be indented by pressing with the finger can be caused by a number of medical condi.tions. Common causes include heart failure, venous disease, as well as liver or kid.ney failure. If ofrecent onset and associated with pain, it may be due to an infection or a blood clot in one of the veins. If new, painful, unilateral, or progressive, or if it extends above the ankle or there is oozing of fluid, referral to a physician is indi.cated. Shortness of breath (dyspnea). Shortness of breath is one of the most common signs of cardiac or respiratory disease. A physician needs to be consulted if it is of recent onset; progressively severe; occurs at night requiring the person to sit or stand for relief; prevents a person from lying flat; or is associated with other symp.toms such as wheezing, bloody sputum, or chest pain. Palpitations. This term refers to an awareness of the heartbeat. Almost always this symptom is associated with a rapid or irregular heartbeat and requires evaluation. If it is recent in onset, fast, or associated with other symptoms such as syncope,feeling of faintness, or chest pain, a referral is urgent. Highblood pressure. An elevated systolice(. 140) or diastolic (. 90) blood pressure requires medical evaluation and treatment in most older adults. Any pressure > 200 should be referred immediately to a physician. Low blood pressure. Any systolic pressure < 100 mm Hg, or any drop in systolicblood pressure of > 20 mm Hg when changing position from lying or sitting to standing, could cause syncope, a stroke, a heart attack, or another serious condi.tion. It could be due to dehydration, blood loss, or a medication. This needs to be confirmed immediately with repeated measurements, and the person needs to be referred to a physician. Signs of respiratory distress. There are a number of signs of respiratory distress that the health care professional should watch for. These include increased respi.ratory rate, cyanosis, intercostal indrawing, forward leaning posture, and use of accessory muscles. . Cyanosis is blue skin around the nail beds and lips or elsewhere. It indicates a low oxygen level and therefore a poor respiratory or cardiovascular status. Cyanosis is not always a reliable sign in persons with darker skin color. . Intercostal indrawing is the observation of intercostal spaces being "sucked" into the chest on inspiration. This is an indication of fatigue of respiratory muscles. . Forward leaning posture is an attempt to maximize the efficiency of the respi.ratory system. . Paradoxical breathing is observed when the abdominal area does not protrude on inspiration and may indicate weakness of the diaphragm, the main muscle of respiration. Smoking. Smoking is a long-recognized cause of cardiac and pulmonary diseases. Ceasing to smoke even after decades of smoking is to be vigorously encouraged. One benefit, for example, is that the risks of postsurgical complications are reduced even a few months after stopping. Exercise and education programs. Persons may be triggered for ADL or IADL interventions. [See ADL and IADL CAPs.]. Evidence is accumulating that persons with many cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological impairments can respond in a safe and efficient manner to training programs that are physiologically based. In addition to exercise, programs for persons with COPD include education, self.management training, and psychological support. The goal of the programs is to improve physical function and endurance and to teach the person to recognize early signs of an exacerbation in order to avoid emergency room and hospital visits. Additional Resources American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Web site for guidelines: www.acc.org Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) Web site: www.goldcopd.com/ and more specifically the guidelines www.goldcopd.com/Guidelineitem.asp?l1=2&l2=l&intld=989 Hunt SA, Baker DW, Chin MH, Cinquegrani MP, Feldman AM, Francis GS, Ganiats TG,Goldstein S, Gregoratos G, Jessup ML, Noble RJ, Packer M, Silver MA, Stevenson LW. 2001. ACC/AHA guidelines for the evaluation and management of chronic heart failure in the adult: A report of the American College of Cardiology/ American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the 1995 Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure). Miriam Hospital Physical Activity Research Center: www.lifespan.org/ behavmed/ researchphysical.htm University ofRhode Island Cancer Prevention Research Center: www.uri.edu/ research/ cp re/ transtheoretical.htm Authors lain Carpenter, MD, FRCP Lewis Lipsitz, MD Knight Steel, MD severely undernourished; a BMI of 16 to 17 = moderately undernourished; and a BMI of 18 = mildly undernourished. About one-half of the persons in this group will regularly leave 25% or more of their food uneaten, and they will be more likely than others to lose weight in the future. This group includes about 10% of persons in long-term care facilities and 8% of persons receiving home care. TRIGGERED -MEDIUM RISK These persons have both a baseline BMI score of 19 to 21 and have no clear indica.tion that death is near. Although not customarily judged to be underweight, about one in five long-term care facility residents in this group will fall into the 18 or lower BMI range by their next full interRAI assessment. Four out of ten of these persons will regularly leave 25% or more of their food uneaten at most meals. This group includes about 18% of persons in long-term care facilities and 14% of persons receiving home care. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. This group includes about 73% of persons in long-term care facil.ities and 78% of persons receiving home care. Undernutrition CAP Guidelines The following review works through a list of the problems that relate to a person's undernutrition and, as relevant, they should be addressed in the care plan. First, determine whether the person is leaving a significant amount of food uneaten at most meals. About one-half of those triggered fall into this category. When this is the case, the key to assessment and care is to reverse this situation. Without an active plan to reverse this situation, the vast majority of these persons will continue to leave significant amounts of food uneaten in the future. In compar.ing those who leave food uneaten with those who do not, higher rates of the fol.lowing are seen: abnormal laboratory values (70% vs. 40%); a greater likelihood of being on a new drug (60% vs. 30%); having a cardiovascular problem, for example, hypertension (51 % vs. 29%), or congestive heart failure (CHF) (23% vs. 10%); and a recent decline in AD Ls (31 % vs. 10%). For persons who do not leave food uneaten, the key to assessment is to determine what they are being given to eat. Like all underweight persons, they might benefit from more complex carbohydrates, whole grains, vegetables, fruit, proteins, and in some cases, fat. But this remains a significant challenge for those triggered by this CAP. The key is to get the person to eat more calories (at least 1,600 a day for an average-sized woman and 2,000 a day for a similar man). To do that, there should be a conversation with the person about his or her food preferences and what it would take to begin to increase slowly her or his caloric intake. Assessment of Current Eating Patterns Failure to eat food provided. at meals. Even a few days of insufficient food intake could lead to a downward process, with accelerated weight loss and de-condition.ing. Unfortunately, over 40% of the persons triggered will regularly leave a signifi.cant proportion of their meals uneaten. Thus, regularly monitoring food intake is important. . Simple monitoring questions: Count the number of meals and between-meal supplements normally provided during the day (for example, one breakfast, lunch, dinner, and all supplements on a given day). What proportion of the food was left uneaten? Is there a pattern as to which foods are left uneaten .for example, meat, potatoes, pasta, bread, vegetables, or fruit? Is the person uninterested in eating processed foods? . Food offered or available is not congruent with the person's food choices (for example, no meats, flavorless), allergies or food intolerance (for example, not lactose-free), religious tenets, or food quality (for example, not like what spouse used to prepare). . The intervals between meals, particularly the fasting hours from the last meal in the evening to the first in the morning. . New medication or treatment regimen that might reduce interest in food. [See Appropriate Medications CAP.] . Unwilling to accept food! supplements or eat more than three meals a day. . Food not meeting special dietary requirements. Factors to Be Considered in Altering Current Eating Patterns Assess the person's food preferences. Include types of foods, types of spices, when he or she likes to eat, and what to avoid. Swallowing problems (dysphagia). This mechanical problem in swallowing is normally associated with one or more of a number of medical conditions or treat.ments (for example, esophagitis, injury from radiation, a malignancy in the neck or esophagus, a stroke, Parkinson's disease, a diverticulum or a stricture, a foreignbody, or end-stage dementia). If dysphagia is present, consider referral for a swal.lowing assessment. . Issues of concern include reluctance to eat certain foods, slowness in eating, complaint of food sticking in the back of the mouth or in the chest, pain on swallowing or when lying down, coughing or choking when eating, and regur.gitation of food. . Ifon a special diet, could the person eat and swallow without this type of diet? The monotony of such diets can themselves lead to lessened intake. . If esophagitis is caused by reflux, treating this problem might help to resolve the swallowing problem. Dental problems. Dental problems might have various causes (for example, a bro.ken or fractured tooth, bleeding gums, loose dentures, oral lesions, dry mouth, or generally poor oral hygiene). . Broken or fractured teeth. Persons with broken teeth require professional attention. . Bleeding gums. Bleeding from around the teeth can be due to inflammation of the gums (gingivitis) or destructive inflammation of the bone surrounding the teeth (periodontitis), and systemic illnesses or medications. . Attention should be paid to regular procedures in oral hygiene. . Professional attention is often warranted if bleeding is present. . Problems with loose or sore dentures. Dentures causing soreness need to be evaluated by a dentist to determine whether they can be adjusted or if replace.ment is necessary. . Lip or mouth lesions (cold sores, fever blisters, canker sores, new lumps in mouth). There are many lesions that occur on the lips and in the mouth that affect chewing. A dentist or physician should evaluate lesions that fail to completely heal within 2 weeks. . Problems with taste or smell. Older adults frequently complain of difficul.ties with taste or smell. One of the most common causes is poor oral hygiene. . Dry mouth. This condition may be caused by multiple medications, diseases, head and neck radiation, and dehydration. The medications commonly impli.cated include antihypertensives, anxiolytics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, anticholinergics, and antihistamines. [See Medications CAP.] Need for others to assist in eating. A reduced ability to feed oneself can be due either to cognitive or physical deficits. . Cognitive deficits relate to staying focused on the act of eating or an inability to comprehend the sequences needed in eating. . Physical deficits include musculoskeletal problems related to conditions such as arthritis, contractures, loss of range of motion in an arm, an inability to sit up, or a missing limb. Approaches to treatment can involve the support of others, prosthetic strategies, and reconditioning/retraining. Feeding an eating-dependent person can require30 to 45 minutes. Prosthetic approaches include the use of special equipment (for example, a weighted spoon), provision of foods the person can eat using his or her residual abilities (for example, a texture-modified menu, finger foods). Retraining consideration will require a consult by an occupational therapist. Disease conditions. Acute and chronic disease, and especially malignancy, can affect the person's nutritional needs by reducing the person's appetite or interest in food or by requiring special feeding or nutritional requirements. Among the condi.tions and diseases to be considered are . Dementia and other neurological diseases, arthritis, asthma, COPD, heart disease, liver disease, renal disease, cancer, diabetes, thyroid disease, or a den.tal or oral condition. . Any recent acute illness or operation can result in weight loss. The problem may be the postoperative course and not the underlying disease itself. Such persons may benefit from a program of adequate nutrition and exercise. . Any acute disease or condition including a fever or an infection, and pain, especially gastrointestinal pain. Cognitive and communication problems.Insufficient food intake and weight loss is associated with the severity of a person's cognitive deficit (especially for a person with a Cognitive Performance Scale [CPS] score of 4 to 6, which translates into a Mini Mental State Examination [MMSE] score ofeless than 10). [See Cognitive Loss and Communication CAPs.] The mechanisms vary, but can include a decline in cues to feed oneself, to chew, to swallow; a decrease in the pleasure of eating; and the emergence of a variety of disruptive behaviors such as wandering in search of pleasurable foods. Primary intervention strategies could be dictated by these condi.tions, including nonthreatening approaches to feeding persons who are physically aggressive or the introduction of a prompting schedule to ensure that all or almost all of the food is eaten. Depression. Depression can cause some persons to decrease the amount of food they eat. A score of 3 or higher on interReAI's Depression Rating Scale (DRS) sug.gests a possible clinically relevant depression. [See Mood CAP.] Medications. Adverse drug ,effects are common reversible causes of decreased nutritional intake. Several drugs have been noted to alter food intake through changes in appetite or the senses of taste and smell, or through adverse gastrointes.tinal side effects. In addition, drugs may interfere with the absorption, metabolism, and excretion of nutrients. On the other hand, the person's ability to cope with everyday living (such as shopping for food and cooking) can be limited when drugs do not lead to the anticipated relief of symptoms (for example, pain). Hence, the prescribed medications should be reviewed by the physician and, when necessary, changed to other types with fewer side effects. . Those using the following drugs may require an adjustment of their nutri.tional care plan: diuretics, certain cardiac drugs, anti-inflammatory drugs, and antiparkinsonian drugs. [See Medications CAPs.] Need for special diets. Dete.rmine which type of special diet the person is on, if any, and whether there is a need to continue that diet. Consult a dietician as needed. . Diabetic diet and restriction of a variety of foods . Weight gain diet . Therapeutic diet -high calorie or high protein diets that have been chopped or blended The physical and social environment. Normal eating requires more than the serv.ing of complete nutrition. The psychosocial setting must be suitable for the eating experience, including the physical layout and who is in the dining space with the person. Prospective monitoring: . Leaving food uneaten . Continued weight loss . How well the person uses adaptive equipment . Continued need for cueing or assistance with eating . Emergence or continuation of a swallowing problem . Changes in food preferences . Assess the "energy density" of the food served Additional Resource National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence Quick Reference Guide. 2006. (February). Oral nutrition support, enteral tube feeding, and parenteral nutrition. www.guideline.gov/summary/summary.aspx?doc_id=8739#s24 Authors Gunnar Ljunggren, MD, PhD Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 21 Dehydration CAP Problem The Dehydration CAP alerts the care professional to the need to assess for possible dehydration. Normally, the body maintains an appropriate quantity of fluid within its cells and the vascular system. This involves maintaining a balance between the amount of water taken in and the quantity excreted by the kidneys and lost in breathing, sweating, and defecating. Dehydration is a condition where the amount lost exceeds the amount taken in by a person who has the appropriate amount to start with. A physical examination may provide evidence that the person is dehydrated. However, in older persons, diagnosing dehydration by assessing the degree of tent.ing of the skin when pinched or the dryness of the mucous parts of the mouth is usually not recommended. Laboratory studies often offer an important indication of the presence of dehydration. In a dehydrated person, the BUN/creatinine ratio in blood almost always increases above approximately 25, and the concentration of hemoglobin in the blood may rise as well. Under most circumstances, the concen.tration of sodium in the serum rises, as the body usually loses water in excess of salt. If there is a significant degree of dehydration, the person's blood pressure may fall and there may be an associated increase in the pulse rate. Dehydration is associated with a long list of medical conditions including gas.troenteritis, diarrhea, infection, renal disease, and excessive use of diuretics. Older persons may become dehydrated in very hot weather when they do not increase their fluid intake appropriately. Fluids may need to be administered orally or intra.venously, depending on the cause of the dehydration and the severity of the condi.tion. Appropriate monitoring of the serum sodium and potassium levels as well as renal function is often required. Overall Goals of Care е Identify and lreat the underlying cause(s) of dehydration. е Rehydrate the person, with the course of Lreatmenl dependent on the extent of the deficits. е Establish an appropriate approach Lo monitoring and JaboraLOry testing to ensure recove1сy and maintenance of an appropriate fluid balance. е Prevent associated complications (hypotension, falls, delirium, constipation). е Provide comfort to those for whom treatment is primarily supportive. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Dehydration CAP Trigger This CAP is based on two items in the interRAI assessment instruments: dehydra.tion and insufficient fluid. Both have relatively low prevalence. The rate of dehydra.tion reported on interRAI assessment instruments ranges from less than 1% up to about 5%, while insufficient fluid rates of 3 to 10% are common. When both prob.lems are present, the clinical significance is likely to be more serious. Two trigger levels, high and low, are specified. Persons in the high-level group have one or more obvious causes for or complications of dehydration. Their clinical course mandates immediate review by a physician. Persons in the low-level group, while still requir.ing close clinical oversight, may be able to be managed by increasing fluid intake and monitoring the person closely. Over a 90-day period, about one-half of the persons assessed as dehydrated (based on these two items) will typically no longer be assessed as dehydrated. Thus, there are two keys to this CAP. First, be vigilant to ensure that a person with these prob.lems is identified as requiring treatment. Second, intervene to make sure the person is rehydrated properly and his or her associated clinical problems are addressed. TRIGGERED -HIGH RISK Persons in this category have first been assessed as dehydrated and/or receiving insufficient fluids. Second, they have been assessed as having one or more of the following causes for or complications of dehydration: . Diarrhea . Vomiting . Delirium (for example, the recent onset of one or more of the following condi.tions: easily distracted, restlessness, varying mental function, lethargy, disor.ganized speech, and altered perception) . Fever . Dizziness . Syncope . Constipation . Weight loss (5% or more in the last 30 days) This group includes about 2 to 6% of persons in long-term care facilities, 1 % of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. TRIGGERED -LOW RISK Persons in this category have been assessed as dehydrated and/or receiving insuffi.cient fluids. However, they do not have any of the associated conditions noted pre.viously. This group includes about 2% of persons in long-term care facilities, 4% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. This group includes about 97% of persons in long-term care facil.ities, 94% of persons receiving home care, and 99% of older adults living indepen.dently in the community. Dehydration CAP Guidelines Identification ofthe Person's Capacityto Be Involved in His or Her Own Treatment Many persons triggered by the Dehydration CAP, no matter where they live, will present with a functional or cognitive problem. The first step in designing a care plan is to assess the seriousness of the problem and then the likelihood the person can take a meaningful role in. resolving it. For this CAP, it is assumed that such a role can be played when the person has the following three capabilities. . First, the person has a Cognitive Performance Score of less than 4. . Second, the person has the ability to move about his or her living space (by walking or in a wheelchair) without the physical help of others and has access to appropriate fluids. . Third, the person will participate in an appropriate monitoring activity to be sure the dehydration and its cause are adequately addressed. This definition applies to about 20% of triggered persons in long-term care facili.ties, 70% of triggered persons receiving home care, and almost all triggered older adults living independently in the community. Physician Communication and Involvement in Assessing and Care Planning Initial management. Clinicians must note that the Dehydration CAP has been triggered and assess the person with respect to the degree of dehydration and whether the person has a high-or a low-level trigger for dehydration. When the person has a high-level trigger, an immediate response is warranted. The clinician should communicate these findings to a physician. In addition, factors that mayhave contributed to or caused dehydration should be brought to the physician's attention. The more comprehensive the information, the easier it will be to deter.mine an appropriate course of action in a timely fashion. For example, knowing that the person has a low-grade fever (which is a high-level trigger feature) and has not been taking fluids well while continuing to take a diuretic will help formulate the course of action. Clinical Observations (many ofwhich canbe drawn from the interRAI Assessment) Are there signs suggestingthe presence ofdehydration? . A rapid pulse or a significant increase in the pulse rate upon assuming an upright position. . Hypotension, or a change in blood pressure of more than 20 mm Hg upon assuming an upright position. . Is the person lethargic, confused, or delirious? Are there signs of an infection? . Specifically, is there fever, cough, lethargy, dysuria, mental status change, diar.rhea, or vomiting? Changes in the person's oralintake: . Does the person leave food uneaten, consuming less than 25% of meals? . Has the person taken in an adequate quantity of fluid? . Is the person taking an excessive dose of a laxative? . Does the person have a swallowing problem? . Does the person tell you that he or she is thirsty? . Does the person limit the input of fluid due to a fear of incontinence? Other considerations that may be relevant to dehydration: . ls the person on a diuretic or has the dose been increased recently? . Is the person on a fluid restriction? . Is the person on a newly prescribed diet? . Is the person on a restricted diet? . Is an intake and output record kept? . Does the person have a disease known to increase the likelihood of dehydration? . Does the person have a history of dehydration? . Does the person have abdominal pain, with or without diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting? Illnesses that predispose to limitations in maintaining normal fluid balance: . Is the person a diabetic, or has there been a change in the medications pre.scribed for diabetes? . Does the person have a swallowing problem that limits the ability to increase fluid intake when needed? . Does the person have a significant degree of renal failure or a known disease of the kidney? . ls the person lethargic for any reason? . Is there newly present constipation, fecal impaction, or weight loss? . Does the person have any behavioral disturbance that precludes him or her from taking sufficient quantities of fluid? . ls there evidence of a new stroke or recent change in mental status? . Is the person medically unstable? . Did the person have a re.cent acute event, for example, hip surgery, that might predispose to dehydration? . Has there been a recent decline in ADLs? . Does the person have a disease, such as Parkinson's disease, that may require an unusually long time to eat? . Has the person recently stopped taking steroids for any condition? (This may require immediate medical intervention.) Additional Resources Fish LC, Davis KM, Minaker KL. 1997. Dehydration. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursinghome. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides a comprehensive approach to assessment and management of dehydration in the nursing home. Case exam.ples are presented. Mentes, JC. 1998. Hydration management research-basedp rotocol. The University of Iowa Gerontological Nursing Interventions Research Center, Research Dis.semination Core. Note: This protocol provides helpful information for develop.ing a comprehensive care plan for persons with dehydration. www.nursing .uiowa.edu Mentes J, Buckwalter K.1997. Getting back to basics. Managing hydration to prevent acute confusion in frail elders.Journ al of Gerontolog icalNursing 23(10): 48-51. Palmer JB, Drennan JC, Baba M. 2000. Evaluation and treatment of swallowing impairments. Am Fam Phy sician (April 15) 61 (8): 2453-62. Weinburg A, Minaker K,The Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical Association. 1995. Dehydration: Evaluation and management in older adults. JAMA274: 1552-56. Weinburg A, Pals J, Levesque P, Beals L, Cunningham T, Minaker K. 1994. Dehydration and death during febrile episodes in the nursing home. JA GS 42: 968-71. Authors Kenneth L. Minaker, MD Knight Steel, MD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 22 Feeding Tube CAP Problem The Feeding Tube CAP triggers persons with a feeding tube, addressing issues rela.tive to the use of a feeding tube and its potential removal. The vast majority of feeding tubes in long-term care facilities are percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes -inserted through the stomach wall. Rarely, jejunostomy tubes (}-tubes) are used, which are similar to PEG tubes but are placed beyond the stomach in the gastrointestinal tract, in the jejunum. Both PEG tubes and J-tubes are intended for long-term use (longer than 2 weeks). Nasogastric tubes (NG), which are inserted through a nostril and into the stomach, are intended for short-term acute conditions or as a trial prior to the initiation of long-term feed.ing (for example, after an acute stroke). These tubes are uncomfortable, may cause nasal and esophageal irritation, and are undignified. Therefore, it is recommended that they not be used for more than 2 weeks. The major focus of this CAP relates to the use of long-term feeding tubes. There are several causes of eating and swallowing problems among persons in long-term care facilities and those living in the community and receiving home care services. The information presented in this CAP needs to be tailored to the specific clinical considerations in each group and to the broader goals of care of the person (that is, comfort or life prolongation). For example, persons with advanced dementia have an irreversible progressive illness and thus, eating problems need to be considered within the context of end-of-life care. In contrast, dysphagia may be a potentially reversible complication in acute stroke patients, in which case tube.feeding may only be needed temporarily. Persons with Parkinson's disease or other motor neuron diseases may have chronic swallowing problems that require long.term feeding interventions. Finally, head and neck cancers may cause structural complications that result in feeding problems. In all cases, decision making about feeding problems should be shared among practitioners, the person being served, and, when appropriate, family members after considering the particular clinical situation, treatment options, and the person's preferences. Facts about Tube Feeding . There is no evidence that the use of a feeding tube improves survival in per.sons with advanced dementia. . Tube feeding will not prevent aspiration of gastric contents or oral secre.tions. Persons who aspirate prior to the placement of a feeding tube likely will continue to aspirate with the tube. . The association between the provision of nutrition via feeding tube and the prevention of pressure ulcers remains unproven. . Many family members are concerned that without tube feeding, a terminallyill person will be hungryor thirsty. However, it has been shown that persons who are terminally ill do not experience hunger or thirst beyond what can be alleviated with ice chips or glycerin swabs. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Overall Goals of Care е Ensure that feeding decisions are in accordance with the overriding goals of care. е Minimize tube feeding in advanced dementia. е Ensllre the person using a feeding tube receives proper care to manage tube feeding, main.Lains nutrition, and avoids compllcntlons. е Review periodically lhe appropriateness of the continued use of tube feeding. е When noL appropriaLe, consider steps to disconUnue tube feeding. Feeding Tube CAP Trigger All persons with a feeding tube will be triggered for review. However, this group is divided according to their cognitive abilities. TRIGGERED -HAS SOME RESIDUAL COGNITIVE ABILITIES This subgroup is defined by two factors: . The person has a feeding tube. . The person has at least some ability to engage in everyday decision making (a score from Independent to Moderately Impaired). This subgroup is more likely to be involved in their own decision making about feeding tube use. They will almost always have at least some ability to understand and be understood by others. This group includes about 3% of persons in long-term care facilities, 1 % of per.sons receiving home care, and almost no older adults living independently in the community. TRIGGERED -ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE ABILITIES This subgroup is defined by two factors: . The person has a feeding tube. . The person has no ability to engage in everyday decision making (a score of Severely Impaired to No Discernable Consciousness). This subgroup includes persons who have profound problems. They have little or no ability to communicate with others. Almost all are functionally dependent in all AD Ls (they have an ADL Hierarchy score of 6). Eighty percent or more cannot balance themselves in a sitting position, have a swallowing problem, and have no control over their bladder. This group includes about 3% of persons in long-term care facilities, 1 % of per.sons receiving home care, and almost no older adults living independently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons (those without a feeding tube). The "Not Triggered" groupincludes about 94% of persons in long-term care facilities, 98% of persons receiving home care, and all, or almost all, persons living independently in the community. Feeding Tube CAP Guidelines Involvement ofthe Health Care Team in the Assessment and Management of Tube-Fed Persons The use of feeding tubes is a complex issue. The expertise of many disciplines is required to assess and care properly for persons with feeding tubes. Nurses play the primary role and are in the position to identify when the expertise of other team members is needed. Nurses must be prepared to alert the physician and dietician to ongoing care issues, complications, and concerns about the appropriateness of tube feeding. It is recommended that a nutritionist or dietician regularly follow all tube.fed persons to assure appropriate intake corresponds with needs. Other disciplines that may be involved include speech and language pathologists (to assess eating and swallowing capabilities), occupational therapists (for positioning to avoid aspira.tion), social workers, and clergy (for ethical dilemmas and psychosocial support). Have psychosocial issues been considered? Eating is an enjoyable social activ.ity, and feeding another person is symbolic of caregiving. Loss of the ability to eat independently can have adverse psychosocial implications for both the person and family members. . Monitor for signs of depression. [See Mood CAP.] . Consider other ways to socially engage the person with a feeding tube. . Provide emotional and social support from social workers, clergy, and other members of the health care team. Nursing Observations Provide Ongoing Management of Person with Tube Feed The DAILY management of a tube-fed person should include the following: . Clean local area around insertion site. . Check skin around insertion site for signs of bleeding or local infection (for example, redness, swelling, purulent drainage). . Monitor for signs or symptoms of gastrointestinal obstruction {abdominaldistension, pain, cramping, hard abdomen, loss of bowel sounds, vomiting, high residuals, diarrhea, lack of bowel movements, or fecal impaction). . Monitor fluid status {dehydration or fluid overload, vomiting). . Monitor for tube dislodgement. . Provide nutritional supplements via feeding tube continuously or as boluses several times daily. The choice of nutritional supplement and mode of delivery should be decided by a physician or nutritionist with physician orders. Periodic evaluations and consultations should include the following: . Weight checked at least monthly. . Lab tests performed periodically to monitor electrolytes, serum albumin, and hematocrit. . Regular periodic evaluations by a nutritionist or dietician. . Periodic assessment for the possibility of resuming oral feeding. A speech and language pathologist or occupational therapist can help with this assessment. . Regular changing and replacement of PEG tubes and J-tubes. Individual pro.grams or facilities may dliffer in their protocol (for example, every 3 months). Identify and Avoid Complications of Tube-Feeding Are any of the following dire-ct complications of tube feeding present upon daily evaluation? Complication  Average % Occurrence  Sign  Actions for Consideration  Infection  Minor  4  Cellulitis around tube insertion  Local antibiotic ointment  Major  1  Fever, hypotension, diaphoresis (sweating)  Consult physician  Bleeding  Minor  <1  Bleeding around insertion  Consult physician  Major  almost 0  Hypotension, drop in Hematocrit, frank blood  Medical emergency; stabilize person and consult physician  Diarrhea and cramping  12  Pain, diarrhea, dehydration  Examine abdomen for signs of obstructionе  Consult physician  Rule out GI infection  Consult nutritionist (may need to change supplement)  Nausea and vomiting  9  Nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention, dehydration  Check for residuals,е slow feeds,е examine abdomen for signs of obstruction,е avoid aspiration  Consult physician and nutritionist  Minor tube problem  4  All may require physician consultation  Dislodgement  Tube no longer in place  Replace tube (Foley catheter sometimes used)  Blockage  Disrupted flow of supplement  Flush tube with water or ginger ale  Leakage  Leaking around tube  Tube may need replacing (Foley catheter sometimes used)  Major tube problem (Bowel perforation)  < 1  Absent bowel sounds, tense abdomen, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or absent bowel movements (fecal impaction), hypotension  Medical emergency Consult physician immediately  еDefinitions: Signs of obstruction: Include abdominal cramps, vomiting, abdominal distention, absent or high-pitched bowel sounds, abdominal tenderness. Residuals: The amount of food remaining in the stomach upon gastric aspiration prior to giving a feeding. Slow feeding: Feeding that progresses slower than the prescribed drip rate. Are any of the following other serious complications related to the use of feed.ing tubes present? . Aspiration -Tube feeding will not prevent a person from aspirating. Per.sons who were aspirating prior to the feeding tube insertion remain at highrisk of recurrent aspiration of oral secretions and gastric contents. Silent aspi.ration occurs often. Aspiration is uncomfortable for the person and can lead to aspiration pneumonia. . Strategies to prevent aspiration in a tube-fed person include the following: Choose appropriate rate for tube feeding (consult with physician and nutri.tionist/ dietician) Monitor for high residuals Oral suctioning when appropriate If taking food orally, use proper feeding techniques. Consult nutritionist, occupational therapist, or speech and language pathologist, as necessary . Signs and symptoms of aspiration pneumonia: Coughing, shortness of breath, increased sputum production Fever, increased respiratory rate, diaphoresis, decline in mental status, agi.tation Hypotension, signs of dehydration . Laboratory results: Elevated white blood cell count, elevated blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, or sodium Consolidation on chest x-ray Hypoxia . Actions for consideration: Stabilize person (for example, consider the use of oxygen) Consult physician, respiratory therapist Person may need antibiotics and parenteral IV hydration Is the person physically restrained or receiving psychotropic medication? Per.sons who are tube fed often have cognitive problems and are easily agitated. They may try to pull out the feeding tube. Thus, agitated persons with feeding tubes are at high risk of being restrained or given psychotropic medications for sedation. Stud.ies have shown that persons who live in long-term care facilities who are tube fed are more likely to be restrained compared to those who are not tube fed. Both physical restraints and psychotropic medications can have serious adverse consequences and should be avoided and used only as a last resort to maintain the tube. [See CAPs on Physical Restraints and Appropriate Medications.] Periodically assess the appropriateness of ongoing tube feeding. The decision to insert a feeding tube was made at some prior time. [See CAPs for Undernutrition and Dehydration.] As with all medical therapies, its continued use should be reas.sessed periodically to ensure that it continues to meet the goals of care for this per.son. Technically, it is very easy to stop tube feeding (most PEG tubes are designedto be removed with moderate traction safely and painlessly). However, emotionally and ethically, discontinuation of tube feeding can be very difficult, and any psycho.social needs of the person and family should be supported. Reasons to discontinue tube feeding include the following: . The person has improved enough to eat and drink by mouth. Consider involv.ing a nutritionist, speech and language pathologist, or occupational therapist in this assessment. . The person has not improved in overall status or adequate oral intake and tube feeding no longer meets the goals of care. Alternative management strat.egies to consider include A conscientious approach to hand-feeding. While hand-feeding may not provide caloric intake, it may provide some positive quality of life for the person. Supportive care (for example, pain control, treatment for shortness of breath, use of glycerin swabs or ice chips to keep the mouth moist, skin care, psychosocial support, etc.) in a terminally ill person. Steps to Consider in Discontinuation of Tube Feeding in Persons Who Have Not Improved in Swallowing or Adequate Oral Intake Laws must be taken into account with regard to the discontinuation of tube feeding and maydiffer from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Is the person cognitively intact and capable of making his or her own health care decisions? . Consider meeting with involved members of the health care team to establish the person's status with regard to tube feeding. . Consider designating members of the health care team, including the physi.cian, to approach the person to review his or her status, the risks and benefits of tube feeding versus supportive care or hand feeding, and to elicit the per.son's preference for tube feeding. This must be an informed decision. . Involve a family member(s) in the decision-making process as appropriate. . Respect the person's choice. Is the person cognitively impaired and incapable of making his or her own health care decisions? . Consider meeting with involved members of the health care team to establish the person's status with regard to tube feeding. . Identify the person who has been either formally or informally designated the substitute decision maker for the person (health care proxy). . Consider a meeting with the designated members of the health care team, including the physician and the substitute decision maker, to review the per.son's status, the risks and benefits of tube feeding versus supportive care, and to provide counseling regarding the continuation of tube feeding. Ifthe person is cognitively impaired and incapable of making his or her own health care decisions, has a substitute decision maker been counseled to con.sider the following? . Does the person have a written advance directive indicating whether or not he or she would want to be tube fed in the current situation? . Has the person ever verbally communicated with family members or health practitioners if he or she would want to be tube fed under the current circum.stances? . After considering what is known about the person's values and preferences, does the substitute decision maker feel the person would want to continue tube feeding in the curr,ent situation if the person were capable of making a decision (a substituted judgment)? . After being informed of the risks and benefits of tube feeding, is it in the per.son's best interests to continue tube feeding? Is there conflict between the person's advance directive or best interests and the substitute decision maker's choice? . In most instances, when the substitute decision maker's choice is fullyinformed, the choice of the substitute decision maker and the wishes of the person as expressed in the advance directive are the same. In this situation the choice of the substitute decision maker should be respected. . Rarely, the substitute decision maker's choice may appear to contradict a per.son's advance directive or best interests. All attempts should be made by the health care team to reach an informed decision with the substitute decision maker. In extraordinary circumstances, referral to an ethics committee or a court may be indicated. Additional Resources Finucane TE, Christmas C, Travis K .1999. Tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia: A review of the evidence.JAMA 282: 1365-70. Note: This article reviews the current evidence of the impact of tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. Gillick MR. 2000. Rethinking the role of tube feeding in patients with advanced dementia. NEJM 342: 206-10. Note: This thoughtful piece presents the contro.versies related to tube feeding in advanced dementia. Mitchell SL, Tetroe A, O'ConnorAM. 2000. Making choices: Long-term feed.ing tube placement in elderly patients. Note: This is a booklet and audiotape designed to assist substitute decision makers with the dilemma of whether to place a feeding tube on an older person with eating problems. It contains information regarding tube feeding, including its risks and benefits, substitute decision making, and how to weigh the information together with the patients' values and preferences. The decision aid can be viewed and ordered online at www.lri.ca/programs/ceu/ohdec/decision_aids.htm or by calling the toll free number (U.S. and Canada only) 888-240-7002. Schneider SM, Raina C, Pugliese P, Pouget I, Rampal P, Hebuterne X. 2001. Outcome of patients treated with home enteral nutrition. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. (July-August) 25(4}: 203-9. Note: This article is evidence-based and gives additional values to the topics. Sheehan MN, Belleville-Taylor P, Fiatarone M, Hartery S. 1997. Feeding tubes. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides a detailed overview of assessment and management of the person with a feeding tube. Case examples are presented. Author Susan L. Mitchell, MD, MPH 