Section 8 Delirium CAP Problem The Delirium CAP focuses on issues of delirium (acute cognitive loss) and the related differential diagnosis of chronic cognitive loss and dementia. Identifying problems and their intertwined causation is central to person's lives. The notions of decline and chronicity need to be taken into account. If the troubles are fluctuating or of recent onset, it is more probable that the issue to be addressed is delirium. Delirium is a serious condition that is usually caused by an underlying acute health problem such as an infection, dehydration, or drug reaction. It is associated with high mortality and morbidity (for example, development of pressure ulcers, functional decline, persistence of behavioral symptoms, hospitalization). This CAP presents an approach to addressing the needs of persons who present with these symptoms.Delirium is common among inpatients or those recently discharged from a health care setting, including large numbers with pre-existing cognitive impair.ment. Approximately 25% of persons admitted to a long-term care facility from an acute-care setting will have a measure of delirium that restricts their success in rehabilitation and prolongs their stay. Rates increase from 25% to 80-90% among persons who are at the end of life, causing discomfort for the dying person and his or her family. Early recognition and treatment of delirium is crucial. Clinicians who are in regu.lar contact with the person are in the best position to recognize, assess, and collabo.rate with physicians and other primary care providers in instituting a plan of care. Delirium is never part of normal aging. Some of its classic signs are often mistaken for the progression of dementia, particularly in the later stages of this condition. Unlike dementia, delirium has a rapid onset (hours to days). Typical signs include difficulty paying attention; fluctuating behavior or cognitive function throughout the day; restlessness; sleepiness during the day; rambling; nonsensical speech; and altered perceptions, such as misinterpretations (illusion), seeing or feeling things that are not there (hallucination), or a fixed false belief {delusion). Successful management depends on an accurate identification of the clinical condition, correct diagnosis of specific cause(s), and prompt nursing and medi.cal intervention. Delirium is often caused and aggravated by multiple factors. If one cause is identified and addressed, but delirium continues, reassess for other potential causes. The focus is on addressing the underlying clinical problems such as treating infections, addressing dehydration, relieving pain and depression, man.aging medications, ensuring optimal sensory input (for example, with the use of glasses and hearing aids), and promoting as normal as possible the social and func.tional status in the environment within which the person is staying. Even when the delirium is identified and interventions are implemented in the hospital setting, the delirium often will still be present when the person is dis.charged to another setting (for example, home, a long-term care facility, or support.ive housing). Both family and formal caregivers need to be aware of interventions that have been successful in starting to reverse the delirium. Family members and caregivers must ensure the person's safety in the home. A person discharged home while still in a delirious state should not be driving a car or operating machinery and should not be responsible for the care of others while in the delirious state. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT In some cases, the person will not be able to be left alone due to safety issues, and will need supervision in taking medications, cooking, and other ADLs. Discharging staff should discuss this with the person and his or her family. Staff can be instru.mental in helping family support any activity restrictions until the person's delirium has cleared. Overall Goals of Care е Identify and treat underlying cause(s) of delirium. е Monitor and care for delirium symptoms and other delirium-related health, mood, and be.havioral symptoms (for example, pulling out lL1bes1 unsafe climbing). е Prevent secondary complications (for example, those associated with physical restraints, falls, dehydration, inappropriate use of psychotropic drugs that may cause or exacerbate delirium). е Prevent a recurrence of delirium. Delirium CAP Trigger TRIGGERED NOT TRIGGERED This CAP is triggered when a person has active symptoms of delirium. The goal of treatment is to return the person to his or her baseline status. This group includes persons who exhibit any of the following symptoms: interRAI Suite Assessment tools (LTCF, HC) . Behavior in the following areas appears different from usual functioning,either new onset or worsening or different from recent times: easily distracted, episodes of disorganized! speech, mental function varies over the course of the day. . Acute change in mental status from person's usual functioning. MDS2.0 . Behavior present over the last 7 days appears different than the person's usual functioning: easily distracted, periods of altered perception or awareness of surroundings, episodes of disorganized speech, periods of restlessness, peri.ods of lethargy, mental function that varies over the course of the day. . Sudden or new onset change in mental function over the last 7 days. This triggered group includes about 1 to 20% of persons in long-term care facilities, 3 to 15% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1% of older persons living independently in the community. This group includes persons who have none of the previously noted symptoms. Delirium CAP Guidelines Physician Communication and Involvement in Assessment and Care Planning Initial management. Assessment and initial treatment of delirium rests with nurs.ing staff and physicians. When this CAP is triggered, it suggests that the person may have delirium. Referral to an appropriately qualified health professional, proficient in the diagnosis of delirium, is an important first step in responding to this triggered CAP. However, if it is not possible to secure a referral within hours, it should be assumed that delirium is present and the person's care should be managed accord.ingly, while waiting for further advice. To coordinate effective care approaches, nurses must be prepared to commu.nicate signs of delirium, CAP guideline assessment findings, and concerns to the physician. The more thorough and factual the communication with the physician, the easier it will be to determine an appropriate course of action in a timely fashion. The absence of significant findings should also be communicated to the physician. For example, observations that the person has stable vital signs, has no fever, has no obvious signs of infection or dehydration, has been eating and drinking ade.quately, and has been receiving no new drugs will help to formulate the next course of action. Nursing Observations Changes in vital signs: . Take and record vital signs (temperature, pulse, respiration, and blood pres.sure). . Compare these vital signs to the person's usual/baseline pattern. The follow.ing measures are clinically significant and should prompt an evaluation for possible causes: Rectal temperatures above 100б F (38б C) or below 95б F (35б C). Pulse rate less than 60 or greater than 100 beats per minute. Respiratory rate over 25 breaths per minute, or less than 16 per minute. For accuracy, count breaths for 1 full minute. Hypotension or a significant decrease in blood pressure: е a systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mm Hg, or е a decline of 20 mm Hg or greater in systolic blood pressure from the person's usual baseline, or е a decline of 10 mm Hg or greater in diastolic blood pressure from the person's usual baseline. Hypertension: е a systolic blood pressure above 160 mm Hg, or е a diastolic blood pressure above 95 mm Hg. Signs of infection: . Fever suggesting a possible urinary tract infection, pneumonia, or other infec.tion. . Because fever may be absent in an immunocompromised person with an infection, pay attention to other signs, including cloudy or foul-smelling urine, congested lungs or cough, dyspnea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, purulent wound drainage, or erythema (redness) around an incision. Indicators of dehydration. [See Dehydration CAP.] If the Dehydration CAP is triggered, proceed under the assumption that this is a problem. If it is not triggered, the following review may help to identify persons not identified by that CAP. . Recent decrease in urine volume or more concentrated urine than usual . Recent decrease in eating habits -skipping meals or leaving food uneaten, weight loss . Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or blood loss . Receiving intravenous drugs . Receiving diuretics or drugs that may cause electrolyte imbalance Person in pain. [See Pain CAP.] . Review pain frequency, intensity, and characteristics (time of onset, duration, quality). . If the person is receiving an analgesic (pain medication), is the dosing ade.quate to avoid pain breakthrough? If the analgesic is suspected as the cause of the delirium, the person should have a trial on another analgesic medication from a different drug classification. Are there indicators of a flare-up of a known chronic condition? Common problems include the following: . Congestive heart failure . Diabetes Signs of hypoglycemia include weakness, sweating, tachycardia, nervous.ness, hunger, and headache. Signs of hyperglycemia include weakness, thirst, greater urine output than usual, and confusion. . Emphysema/COPD with shortness of breath, wheezing . CVA (stroke) or TIA (transient ischemic attack): any new slurring of speech, limb weakness or numbness, vision changes, new or worsening incontinence, new facial asymmetry . Thyroid disease . Gastrointestinal bleeding . Review any recent changes in physician orders and new laboratory values Signs of recent functional decline. [See ADL CAP.] . Recent decline in overall ADL status -assess why ADLs have declined and the likelihood of recovery following reversal of the delirium. Is the ADL decline secondary to delirium? . In what ADL area(s) is the decline present -hygiene, locomotion, eating? Are there associated falls? [See Falls CAP.] Drug Review Review the medications the person is taking to identify drugs or regimens that might be associated with delirium. A consulting pharmacist can be invaluable in this review. . Is (are) there new medication(s) or dosage increase(s)? Review the length of time from medication change(s) to the onset of symptoms. The person could have been on delirium-inducing medications while in acute care and the effects may still be present on discharge to a subacute unit or long-term care facility. . Is there any specific medication known to contribute to delirium? Almost any drug can cause delirium, but common medications include Drugs with anticholinergic properties (for example, some antipsychotics, antidepressants, antiparkinsonian drugs, antihistamines) Opioids (narcotic pain drug), especially Demerol (meperidine), which is often used postsurgically Benzodiazepines, especially long-acting agents Recent abrupt discontinuation, omission, or decrease in dose of short-or long-acting benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepine withdrawal is important to consider in recent (re)admissions from home, hospital, or other institution. Drug interactions (pharmacist review may be required) It is important to note that drug errors or adverse drug reactions result.ing from drug or dosage changes (intended or inadvertent) during transfer from hospital to a long-term care facility are a common problem in older persons. Communication with the hospital to minimize these problems may be critical. . Is the person taking more than one drug from a particular class of drugs? A pharmacist may be helpful in this review. . Consider drug toxicity, especially if the person is dehydrated or has renal insufficiency. Does the person have a history of drug toxicity? Review the record. Serum drug level should be considered for some drugs. Monitor for Associated or Progressive Signs and Symptoms . Sleep disturbances (for example, up and awake at night/asleep during the day) . Agitation and inappropriate movements (for example, unsafe climbing out of bed or chair, pulling out tubes). In these situations, the person may need one-on-one supervision. Physical restraint should only be considered as a last resort and only if it is clinically justified (for example, if the person needs a lifesaving drug or fluid via intravenous tube and restraint alternatives, such as diversion, are ineffective). [See Restraint CAP.] . Motor hypoactivity (for example, low or lack of motor activity, lethargy, or sluggish responses), increasing the risk of aspiration and pressure ulcers . Perceptual disturbances common to drug withdrawal such as hallucinations (seeing or feeling things not present) and delusions (for example, mistaking a blowing curtain for a person climbing in a window) Other Considerations Psychosocial issues to consider: . Any recent change in mood (for example, crying, social withdrawal). Remem.ber that delirium is often a frightening experience for the person. He or she needs reminders that the condition is temporary. . Any recent change in social situation (for example, isolation, recent loss of family member or friend!). For persons who have experienced an environmen.tal change, first rule out other causes of delirium. Physical or environmental factors that could make confusion worse: . Is the person's hearing or vision impaired? Impairment may have an impact on the person's ability to process information (directions, reminders, environ.mental cues). Make sure the person uses his or her glasses or hearing aids (if usually worn). . Is the person not receiving frequent reorientation, reassurance, or reminders to help him or her make sense of things? . Has there been a recent change in environment (for example, an intensive care unit stay, room or unit change, new admission, or return from hospital)? Avoid moving the person to a new setting unless indicated clinically. . Is there anything that is interfering with the person's ability to get enough sleep (for example, light, noise, frequent disruptions)? . Is the environment noisy or chaotic (for example, calling out, loud music, con.stant commotion, frequent caregiver changes)? End of life considerations. Delirium is common at the end of life. However, it is not usually appropriate to begin an aggressive or invasive work-up to identify the cause(s) of delirium in persons who are actively dying or who have orders for "com.fort measures only:' A more focused evaluation to determine if current palliative measures are adequate in managing the person's, family's, or unit's (for example, the person is very noisy) comfort is warranted. Discussion with the family is key to establishing goals for care. A balance must be sought between the degree of pain control and the level of consciousness desired. The goals and approach of care should be directed to achieving maximum comfort. Consider the following: . Is the person in pain? An increased dose or frequency of administration or a stronger or additional analgesic may be warranted. . Are the person's medications contributing to the delirium? The drug review should emphasize opioids (narcotics), neuroleptics (antipsychotics), antiepileptics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and other pain reliev.ers, antibiotics, and drugs for constipation and diarrhea. Would the person be more comfortable without the drug or with a lower dose, or does the benefit of comfort from the drug outweigh the side effect of delirium? . Does the person have "terminal agitation" (uncontrollable delirium)?Sedation may be warranted to decrease fear and suffering and prevent acci.dental injury. Additional Resources American Psychiatric Association (APA). 2004. Practice guideline for treatment of patients with delirium. American Journal of Psychiatry (May). Note: This guideline provides a detailed general overview of the delirium syndrome and the role of the psychiatrist in delirium management. These guidelines are also available at the APA Web site: www.psych.org (click on "Clinical Resources" and then click on "Practice Guidelines"). This site also includes Patient and Family Guides that would also be useful in training nurse assistants. American Psychiatric Association (APA). 2004. Practice guideline for treatment of patients with delirium. American Journal of Psychiatry (August).Flacker JM, Marcantonio ER. 1998. Delirium in the elderly: Optimal manage.ment. Drugs and Aging 13: 119-30. Note: This article provides a detailed approach to treatment and monitoring of delirium. Inouye SK. 2006. Current concepts: Delirium in older persons. N Engl J Med. 354: 1157-65. Murphy KM, LevkoffS, Lipsitz LA. 1997. Delirium. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides an overview of the syndrome particularly as it affects nursing home persons and staff. Detailed nonpharma.cologic approaches and case examples are presented. Rapp CG. 1999. Acute confusion/delirium (evidence-based protocol). The Iowa Veterans Affairs Nursing Research Consortium, University of Iowa Gerontolog.ical Nursing Interventions Center. Note: This protocol provides helpful infor.mation for developing a comprehensive care plan for persons with delirium. www.nursing.uiowa.edu Authors Katharine M. Murphy, PhD, RN Edward Marcantonio, MD Sharon K. Inouye, MD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 9 Communication CAP Problem While many conditions can affect how a person expresses and comprehends infor.mation, the Communication CAP focuses on the interplay between the person's communication status and his or her cognitive skills for everyday decision making. Normal communication involves two related activities: . Expressive communication: Making oneself understood to others, usually verbally but also through nonverbal exchange. Typical expressive problems include disruptions in language, speech, and voice production. Specific mani.festations include difficulty in finding suitable words, putting a sentence together, or describing objects and events; pronouncing words incorrectly; stuttering; hoarse or distorted voice; and low volume because of poor respira.tory status. The percentage of persons with at least some difficulty in making themselves understood ranges from 15% of those living independently in the community, to 25% of those receiving home care, to 40% of persons in long.term care facilities. . Receptive communication: Comprehending or understanding the verbal or written communication of others. Typical receptive communication problems include changes/difficullties in hearing, speech discrimination, vocabulary comprehension, reading, and interpreting facial expressions. The percentage of persons with at least some difficulty in comprehending the verbal commu.nication of others ranges from 10% for those living in the community, to 25% of persons receiving home care, to 50% of persons in long-term care facilities. Overall Goals of Care е Prevent avoidable loss of communicationtskills for as long as possible. е Reverse or improve communication loss. е Monitor a list of common causal factors and treat as appropriate. е Work with families and caregivers to ensure effective communication with the person. Communication CAP Trigger The goal of this CAP is twofold: first, to work to improve communication ability whenever possible; and second, to prevent avoidable communication decline. Any.one triggered should receive a specialized communication care plan follow-up. The key difference between the following two triggered groups is whether the goal of care is improvement or preventing decline. Section 9 Communication CAP ss еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT TRIGGERED TO FACILITATE IMPROVEMENT This subgroup is defined by the presence of both of two factors: . Moderate to severe communication shortfalls, which include both communi.cation with others and understanding communication from others; and . Some ability to engage in everyday decision making (a measure of cognitive reserve). Given these cognitive abilities, persons in this subgroup are the most likely to experience improvements in communication. Yet, only a minority (about 15%) will improve over the ensuing 90-day period, and the principal focus of care is to increase the likelihood of this happening. Note that this group includes about 11 % of persons in long-term care facilities, 8% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. TRIGGERED TO PREVENT DECLINE This subgroup is also defined by a person's communication and everyday decision.making ability, but in this instance the person has better baseline communication skills and poorer everyday decision-making capability. Given the absence of cognitive reserves, this subgroup is the most likely to decline in communication. Yet, only a minority will decline (about 15%), and the principal focus of care is to reduce the likelihood of this happening. Note that this groupincludes about 25% of persons in long-term care facilities, 10% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED This subgroup includes anyone for whom either functional recovery or functional maintenance to prevent decline is not a clinically realistic care goal. There is a bal.ance between communication skills and cognitive ability (as measured by everyday decision making). There are three such groupings: good communication and good cognition, middle communication and middle cognition, and poor communication and poor cognition. This subgroup is the least likely to change over time, as communication ability matches cognitive ability. Note that this group includes about 64% of persons in long-term care facilities, 88% of persons receiving home care, and 99% of older adults living independently in the community. Care for persons in this group is lim.ited to monitoring for any unexpected decline in communication levels. Communication CAP Guidelines When communication is limited, assessment focuses on reviewing several factors: underlying causes of the deficit, the success of attempted remedial actions, the per.son's ability to compensate with nonverbal strategies (for example, ability to visually follow nonverbal signs and signals), and the willingness and ability of caregivers to ensure effective communication. In the presence of reduced language skills, both caregivers and the person must expand their nonverbal communication skills .one of the most basic and automatic of human abilities. Touch, facial expression, eye contact, hand movements, tone of voice, and posture are all powerful means of communicating. Recognizing and using all practical means is the key to effective communication. Assess the person for confounding problems and address them. [See relevant CAPs.] As these confounding problems lessen or further decline is prevented, the person's communication abilities should be reviewed. . Decline in cognitive status, especially recent onset of acute confusion (delirium) . Increased number of mood indicators (for example, an increase on the Depression Rating Scale [DRS]) . Decline in ADL status . Deterioration in respiratory status in persons with COPD . Oral motor function -swallowing, clarity of voice production Assess and correct, where possible, the components ofcommunication. Details of the person's strengths and weaknesses in understanding, hearing, and expression are part of a supportive treatment program. . Hearing impairment: Check that proper hearing appliance is present, operat.ing correctly (for example, batteries are working), and is being used. Deter.mine if the person is able to understand in particular situations, for example, in a quiet environment or when talking one-on-one where he or she can see the other's lips. . Communication success: lf the person is able to communicate more effec.tively with certain individuals, then try to determine why this is the case. For example, does the person speak slowly and distinctly, use specific gestures or motions, or communicate in another language? Ensure provision of this effec.tive mode of communication. . Nonverbal communication: lf the person has the capacity to use communi.cation devices or other nonverbal modes of communication, ensure that the staff and/or caregiver is aware of the need to employ such procedures and is trained in their use. . Recent decline in hearing: Review for potential causes, including presence of ear discharge(s) and cerumen (wax) accumulation. Review treatment and evaluation history: . Has the person received an evaluation by an audiologist or Speech-Language Pathologist (SLP)? How recently? . Has the person's condition worsened since the most recent evaluation? . lf such an evaluation resulted in a plan of care, has it been followed as specified? Factors to be assessed and addressed for possible relationship to communica.tion problems: . Recent onset conditions (for example, aphasia secondary to stroke). If improvement is possible, consider referral to a SLP. . Chronic or recurrent conditions (for example, Alzheimer's disease or other dementia, aphasia following a stroke, Parkinson's disease, mental health prob.lem). For chronic conditions that are unlikely to improve with treatment, consider communication interventions that might compensate for losses (for example, for moderately impaired persons with Alzheimer's disease, the use of short, direct phrases and tactile approaches to communication can be effective). . Conditions that may display voice production deficits (for example, asthma, emphysema/COPD, Parkinson's disease, cancer, or poorly fitting dentures). Consider a consultation with a physical therapist for breathing exercises or cardiorespiratory endurance training, physician, or dentist. . Transitory conditions (for example, delirium, infection(s), or an acute ill.ness). Are there acute or transitory conditions, which if successfully resolved might result in an improved ability to communicate? (See Delirium CAP or refer to physician.] . Assess the person's drug regimen for conditions that could impair his or her ability to communicate. Would drug titration or substitution result in an improved ability to communicate? Consult with the physician when the fol.lowing medications are used: Psychotropic medications such as antidepressent agents and tranquilizing agents (including antipsychotic, anti-anxiety, and sedative agents) Opioid (narcotic) analgesics Antiparkinsonian medications Antibiotics such as gentamycin and tobramycin Aspirin . Assess the person's opportunities to communicate where the quality and quantity of communication are equal to apparent ability. Are opportuni.ties to communicate limited in ways that could be corrected (for example, the availability of others to communicate with or the use of a communication board or computer)? Additional Resource Lubinski R, Frattali C, Barth C. 1997. Communication. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, and Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides an approach assessment of the person with communication deficits, including how to assess and address underlying problems and tips for care planning. Authors Rosemary Lubinski, EdD Carol Frattali, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 10 Mood CAP Problem Mood disorders (for example, depression, sadness, and anxiety) are common prob.lems for adults in the community and in institutional settings. Depression is often underdiagnosed and undertreated. Where symptom rates are low, underdiagnosing must be considered. Left untreated, mood disorders are disabling and associated with high mortality, functional decline, and unnecessary suffering by the person, family, and caregivers. This CAP focuses on identifying depression, with a pre.existing diagnosis or a depressed mood state that requires attention and possible diagnosis. Overall Goals of Care е ldentify and address any immediate threats to the person's, or other's, safety that is posed by the mood state. е Identify and treat any underlying conditions that may have caused or contributed to the mood state. е Implement a treatment for the mood problem. е Monitor for response to treatment or adverse effects of treatment. Mood CAP Trigger There are three levels to the Mood CAP trigger. The triggers are based on the per.son's Depression Rating Scale (DRS). Note that while other items in the interRAI assessment may assist with further evaluation, the DRS is the best indicator of a potential or actual problem with depression. TRIGGER RULES FOR THE MOOD CAP . First, calculate the DRS by adding the person's code response for the following items. In the interRAI suite each item is first recoded such that O = 0, 1, 2 = 1, and 3 = 2, creating a scale ranging from Oto 14. Person made negative statements Persistent anger with self or others Expressions of what appear to be unrealistic fears Repetitive health complaints Repetitive anxious complaints or concerns Sad, pained, or worried facial expressions Crying, tearfulness еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT In most computer applications, the DRS will already have been programmed into the system. . Second, assign the person to a trigger level as follows: TRIGGERED -HIGH RISK: DRS SCORE OF 3 OR HI GHER This group includes about 20% of persons in long-term care facilities, 25% of home care recipients, and 5% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 42% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period. The rate of improvement in home care tends to be about the same. TRIGGERED -MEDIUM RISK: DRS SCORE OF 1 OR 2 This group includes about 30% of persons in long-term care facilities, 25% of home care recipients, and 5% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 25% of the persons triggered into this group will improve over a 90-day period. The rate of improvement for home care recipi.ents is the same, about 25%. NOT TRIGGERED -DRS SCORE OF 0 This group includes about 50% of persons in long-term care facilities, 50% of home care recipients, and 90% of older adults living independently in the community. Mood CAP Guidelines Overview of the Approach to the Person with a Mood Disorder . Initial assessment and stabilization. There is a spectrum of severity of mood disorders, ranging from mild to life threatening. One primary objective of the initial assessment is to determine whether a person has symptoms of a severe mood disorder that place him or her or others at risk for harm. Clinicians must be able to identify when a person is at risk or poses an imminent risk to others and communicate these findings to the appropriate mental health pro.fessionals so that interventions to maintain safety can be implemented imme.diately. . Determination of the nature of the mood disorder. There are many pos.sible precipitants to the development of mood disorder symptoms, including psychosocial stressors {such as personal loss), relapse of an underlying mental health problem, a medication side effect, or an active medical condition. It is not uncommon for a person to have more than one precipitant. Selection of the appropriate treatment relies heavily on the assessment of factors contrib.uting to the mood problem. . Treatment and monitoring. There are many possible treatments appropriate to the wide range of mood disorders. The person who receives treatment must be monitored, as treatment (for example, dose of a medication) may need to be adjusted depending on the person's response. Initial Assessment Observations Is the person at risk for self-harm? . Inquire about suicidal thoughts (that is, "suicidal ideation") and actions: Has the person made a suicide plan? Has the person attempted suicide in the past? Has the person taken any risky actions such as stockpiling pills, saying good-bye to family, giving away possessions, or writing a note? Has the person intentionally harmed or tried to harm him-or herself? Has the person been refusing to eat or drink? Has the person experienced recent anorexia or weight loss? [See Dehydration CAP and Undernutrition CAP.] Has the person been refusing medication or other therapies? Observe for impaired judgment or safety awareness (for example, a person with depression can experience a sense of hopelessness and helplessness, which in turn can have a negative impact on judgment and decisions that he or she makes). Is the person at riskfor harming others? . Observe for increased anger, mood !ability, or agitation. . Inquire if the person feels threatened by others or has thoughts of harming someone else (for example, a person with a mood problem may have delu.sional thinking, including paranoia). . Check for weapons (for example, firearms) and objects that could be used as weapons (for example, dinnerware, sharp pencils, or scissors). Characterize the full spectrum of symptoms of the mood disorder. . Assess for subjective symptoms of a mood problem by asking the person whether he or she feels depressed. Note that even persons with dementia often can reply adequately when asked. Person reports feeling sad or an absence of pleasurable moments in life. Person reports having no interest in usual activities or complains of feeling too tired to participate. The person may report increased difficulty concen.trating on customary activities. Person describes feelings of worthlessness or guilt (for example, a person may complain of feeling like he or she has become a burden to the family). Person reports diminished appetite or a change in sleep habits. . Observe for the following objective signs of a mood problem: Person displays increased tearfulness or sadness. Sleep disturbance: either difficulty sleeping or increased sleep. Consider keeping a sleep log to accurately track sleep habits. Person's activity level appears low. Person eats poorly and loses weight [see Undernutrition CAP] or eats more than usual. . Signs and symptoms of mania or hypomania should also be explored for per.sons who trigger the Mood CAP. This information can assist with the clinical management of the disorder, as it will assist in identifying a depressed mood related to a bipolar disorder. Review for a history of the following indicators: Racing thoughts or euphoria Increased irritability Frequent mood changes Pressured speech Flight of ideas Marked decrease in the need for sleep Agitation or hyperactivity . Attempt to quantify how long the subjective and objective changes have been present. Inquire whether family or friends of the person have observed a change in mood. Determination of the Cause of the Mood Disorder Review the person's medications for drug(s) or regimen(s) that can be associ.ated with mood changes. Large numbers of prescribed or over-the-counter medi.cations can cause mood changes. Request that a pharmacist or physician review the person's full drug regimen. This assessment should focus on (1) whether any drug could be causing or exacerbating the mood disorder; and (2) whether the antide.pressant drug prescribed is at a therapeutic dosage for a significant period of time. . Any new medication(s), or frequency or drug dosage change? Review the length of time from change to onset of symptoms. [See Appropriate Medica.tions CAP.] . Any specific medication that may be associated with a mood problem? For example, some medications in the following categories have been associated with mood problems: Corticosteroids Cardiac medications Anticholinergics Anticonvulsants Glaucoma medications Antibiotics Chemotherapeutic agents Narcotics Antipsychotics Other drugs, such as interferon and some over-the-counter medications . Cessation of a medication (for example, corticosteroids or antidepressant medications) may be associated with a mood problem. New medications are regularly appearing on the market, and some herbal remedies can positively or negatively affect mood. Is the development of a mood problem associated with a change in the person's medical condition? Check for the presence of . Delirium -This can mimic depression but may be able to be distinguished from depression by the presence of fluctuating levels of consciousness and new or worsening cognitive impairment. [See Delirium CAP.] . Infection -Examine the person for signs of infection including fever, foul.smelling cloudy urine, or purulent sputum. . Pain is often associated with depression, and in these cases assessing and managing both has to be considered. [See Pain CAP.] . Other examples of medical conditions associated with mood problemsinclude thyroid abnormalities, dehydration, metabolic disorders, recent CVA (stroke), dementia, and cancer. [See Cognitive Loss CAP.) . Consider consulting a physician to diagnose and treat the medical condition. ls the development of a mood problem associated with any psychosocial changes? . Any recent change in environment (for example, moving from the life-long home to an apartment in a senior housing complex or into a long-term care facility}? . Any recent change in relationships (for example, illness or loss of a relative or a friend, or a relative moving out of town}? . Any recent change in health perception (for example, perception of being seriously ill)? . Any clinical or functional change that may affect the person's dignity (for example, new or worsening incontinence, communication decline)? What has been the course of the mood problem? . Has the change in mood been abrupt or gradual? Mood disorders rarely develop overnight, and a sudden onset may be a clue to an acute medical ill.ness or delirium. . Has the mood change been constant or has the person's mood fluctuated between extremes? Does the person havea history of a mood problem? . Is there a record of a mood disorder or treatment of one in the past? . Was treatment for a mood disorder changed or discontinued recently? Towhat extent do symptoms of anxietyco-occur with the mood disturbance? . Although distinct disorders, there is the possibility of occurrence of both mood and anxiety disorders. Treatment and Monitoring Response to treatment: . Continue to monitor safety. Monitor for the presence of suicidal feelings. Thoughts of suicide should always be taken seriously. In some persons with depression, the suicide risk may increase during the early treatment phase when the person's energy is restored. Consider referral to a mental health professional. Continue to monitor for signs of dehydration and assess nutritional status. . Monitor mood state. Is the mood responding to treatment as anticipated? Are there signs that the person may be developing a different mood prob.lem? For example, a person with bipolar disorder may cycle into a manic episode when treated for depression. . Monitor for the onset of treatment side effects. Anticholinergic side effects (for example, delirium, severe constipation, dry mouth, urinary retention, and blurred vision). New sleep disturbance (insomnia, sudden need for less sleep, or daytime drowsiness). Postural hypotension or gait unsteadiness. Confusion (for example, persons treated with electroconvulsive therapy for a mood disorder may experience transient confusion after treatments). Need for education about the mood disorder and its treatment: . What are the person's expectations about psychotherapy or counseling? . What are the person's concerns about the effects and side effects of psychotro.pic medication? [See Appropriate Medications CAP.] . What are the person's expectations about the course of recovery? For example, a person may be unaware that several weeks of treatment with an antidepres.sant medication may be required before symptoms improve. . Is the person aware that his or her treatment will require ongoing evaluation, titration of drug dosages, and sometimes a change to different medications in order to achieve adequate dosing, optimal treatment effects, and minimal side effects? . Is the person aware of the need for a maintenance treatment to prevent relapse of the mood problem? . If the person is receiving home care or lives in an assisted living facility, is he or she aware of community resources to obtain additional information on mood disorders? Make sure the team, the person, and the family are aware of the planned length of the treatment, the time frame needed for the treatment to be effective, and the potential adverse effects to watch for. [See Appropriate Medications CAP.] Additional Resources Alexopoulos GS, Bruce ML, Hull J, Sirey JA, Kakuma T. 1999. Clinical deter.minants of suicidal ideation and behavior in geriatric depression. Archives of General Psychiatry (November). Note: This article reports the results of a study to determine risk factors for suicide in the elderly and provides a brief review of the epidemiology of suicide in the elderly. Block SD. 2000. Assessing and managing depression in the terminally ill person. Annals of Internal Medicine (1 February). Note: This article, prepared for the End-of-Life Care Consensus Panel of the American College of Physicians .American Society of Internal Medicine, reviews the challenges encountered in the diagnosis and treatment of grief and depression in the terminally ill person. Case examples are used to illustrate points. Burrows AB, Morris JN, Simon SE, Hirdes JP, Phillips C. 2002. Development of a minimum data set-based depression rating scale for use in nursing homes. Age and Aging 29: 165-72. Satlin A, Murphy KM. 1997. Depression. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Note: This chapter provides an overview of the risk factors, presenting signs and symptoms, and treatment options for depression in the elderly. Particular attention is given to the relationship between dementia and depression. Clinical Practice Guidelines American Psychiatric Association (APA). 1994. Practice guideline for the treat.ment of patients with bipolar disorder. American Journal ofPsychiatry (Decem.ber). Note: This guideline uses an approach similar to the depression guideline for the assessment and management of bipolar disorder. American Psychiatric Association (APA). 2000. Practice guideline for the treat.ment of patients with major depressive disorder (revision). American Journal ofPsychiatry (April). Note: This guideline provides a detailed general overview of the clinical characteristics of major depression and the treatment options. Flowcharts are used to assist with decision making. These guidelines are also available at the APA Web site: www.psych.org (click on "Clinical Resources" and then click on "Practice Guidelines"). This site includes Patient and FamilyGuides, which would also be useful in training nursing assistants. Depression in primary care: Detection and diagnosis. 1993. Vol. 1: Detection and Diagnosis Clinical Practice Guideline #5. AHCPR Publicationt# 93-0550 (April). (Available online at www.nlm.nih.gov) Diagnosis and treatment of depression in late life. 1991. NIH Consensus State.ment. (November 4-6). 9(3):1-27. (Available on line at www.nlm.nih.gov). Lebowitz BD, Pearson JL, Schneider LS, et al. 1997. Diagnosis and treatment of depression in late life: Consensus statement update. JAMA 278(14): 1186-90. (Available online at www.nhn.nih.gov) Piven MLS.t1998. Detection of depression in the cognitively intact older adult (research-based protocol). University of Iowa Gerontological Nursing Interventions Research Center, Research Dissemination Core 10. www.nursing.uiowa.eduTreatment of major depression. 1993. Vol. 2: Treatment of major depression. Clinical Practice Guideline #5. AHCPR Publication #93-0551 (April). Authors Eran D. Metzger, MD Terry Rabinowitz, MD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 1 1 Behavior CAP Problem The Behavior CAP focuses on reversing the daily display of troubling behaviors in the following areas: . Wandering -moving with no rational purpose, seemingly oblivious to needs or safety. . Verbal abuse -threatening, screaming at, or cursing others. . Physical abuse -hitting, shoving, scratching, or sexually abusing others. . Socially inappropriate or disruptive behavior -examples include mak.ing disruptive sounds or noises, screaming out, smearing or throwing food or feces, hoarding, or rummaging through other's belongings. . Inappropriate public sexual behavior or public disrobing . Resisting care -examples include verbal or physical resistance to taking medications, taking injections, completing a variety of activities of daily living (AD Ls), or eating. The daily occurrence of such behaviors is disruptive to both the person and others with whom the person comes in contact. Such behaviors may lead to restricting the person's mobility or interactions with others, and in worst cases to functional decline. The immediate goal of care is to reduce the frequency to less than daily occurrences and eventually to eliminate all occurrences. For those exhibiting these behaviors less than daily, the immediate goal of care is to prevent the behaviors from increasing in frequency and secondarily to eliminate them. These behavior symptoms are most often set in motion by a declining cognitive status or episodes of severe mental illness, although they can have other causes as well. Thus, understanding the nature of the problem and addressing the underlying causes have the potential to improve the quality of the person's life and the quality of the lives of those with whom the person interacts. Overall Goals of Care е Eliminate underlying conditions or slressors that contribute to behavioral problems. е Decrease the frequency or intensity of the behavior problems and prevent future escalation of the problems. е Prevent secondary complications arising from the behaviors (for example, developing un.settled relationships with.tothers, being abused by olhers, being physically restrained, or being admitted to a long-term care facility). е Help staff and family caregivers cope with the existence of remaining behavior problems. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Behavior CAP Trigger TRIGGERED TO REDUCE THE OCCURRENCE OF DAILY BEHAVIORS This group includes persons who display any of the following behaviors (or their equivalent) daily: . Wandering . Verbally abusing others . Physically abusing others . Socially inappropriate or disruptive behavior . Inappropriate public sexual behavior or public disrobing . Resisting care This triggered group includes about 10% of persons in long-term care facilities, 3% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1% of older adults living indepen.dently in the community. Over a 90-day period, about one-third of these persons will improve so that none of these behaviors are exhibited daily. TRIGGERED TO PREVENT BEHAVIORS FROM OCCURRING DAILY This group includes persons who exhibit any of the previously mentioned behaviors on a less than daily basis ( or when frequency was not present on the assessment, the behavior tended to be easily altered). This triggered group includes about 8% of persons in long-term care facilities, 7% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1% of older adults living indepen.dently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED This group includes persons who have not exhibited any of the previously men.tioned behaviors in the observation period during the last 3 days. This group accounts for about 82% of persons in long-term care facilities, 90% of persons receiving home care, and 99% of older adults living independently in the community. Appropriate care for these persons is limited to monitoring for any unexpected new problematic behaviors. Behavior CAP Guidelines Initial considerations. For persons displaying behavioral symptoms, a three-step approach to care is recommended. . Step 1: Characterize the specific nature of the behavioral symptoms. Assume that the behaviors displayed may be a means for the person to communicate the presence of existing or new health problems, discomfort, or fears. To ignore this possibility can further isolate someone who has limited cognitive skills or severe mental health problems. . Step 2: As best as possible, identify the factors causing or exacerbating the behavior. Often disruptive behaviors are new, and as such, the person mayhave modifiable problems that can be addressed through good quality care. The review that follows focuses on the principal causal factors that must be considered. When a specific cause is identified as the probable explanation, work with the physician, other care professionals, and when possible, the per.son, to establish a remedial plan of care. . Step 3: Build on the person's strengths. Step 1: Characterize the specific nature ofthe behavioral symptoms. Active behaviors are often a form of communication, possibly about a mental or physical illness, an unmet need or fear, or the person's environment. Some are obvi.ous, such as screaming or physical aggression. Other behaviors are less obvious, such as withdrawal from activities, isolation, or fear-induced agitation. In clarifying the nature of the behavior and related behavioral symptoms, consider the following: . If the person is able to communicate, ask directly about his or her view of the situation. Does the person have an explanation for the behavior? Was he or she afraid? In pain? Excited or agitated? Hypervigilant? Was he or she aware of the consequences of the action? . Describe the behavior in specific terms to facilitate understanding of its source or meaning, describing the behavior and what was happening when the behavior occurred. Was aggressive behavior provoked (responsive) or unprovoked, especially when considered from the person's perspective? Was it offensive (attacking someone else) or defensive (protecting oneself}? Was it purposeful? Was there an intent to harm in the behavior or was it a reflexive response? Did it occur during specific activities (such as a bath)? Was there any pattern, such as occurring at certain times of day? Who was in the vicinity and involved? . Did the environment influence the person's behavior (for example, lighting, noise, or setting)? . Was it a reaction to a particular action, such as the person being physically moved? . ls the person affected by sensory problems, particularly related to vision and hearing? If the person has problems with vision, is he or she often startled by others appearing in his or her field of vision unexpectedly? Does the person become confused by being unable to understand others because of hearing problems? Step 2: Identi fy the factors causing or exacerbating the behavior. Does the person have a long-standing mental health problem possibly associated with the behavioral disturbances? Examples include schizophrenia, bipolar disor.der, depression, antxiety disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder. A detailed psychiatric evaluation and a physician-directed plan of care are required when these conditions stand behind the disruptive behavior. . Common symptoms include delusions, hallucinations, motor excitation, grandiosity, hostility, irritability, hyperarousal state, sleeplessness, flashbacks, startled responses, and phobias (for example, fear of needles, or fear oftleaving the room). . Some of these conditions can be addressed with medical or drug treatment. [See Mood CAP.] Others that are less responsive to traditional therapiesshould still be identified, understood, and addressed in care planning. For example, the physician may recommend a combination of drug interventions and nondrug interventions. . Persons exhibiting long-standing problem behaviors related to psychiatric conditions may lack the ability to develop strategies to bring trouble in their lives under their own control. These persons may place others in danger of physical assault, intimidation, or embarrassment. They also place themselves at increased risk of being stigmatized, isolated, abused, and neglected by loved ones and those who provide care. Does the person have dementia or recent cognitive loss? Examples include Alzheimer's disease, a stroke, and a decline in the person's Cognitive Performance Scale (CSP) score. [See Cognitive Loss CAP.] . Did the symptoms occur suddenly, following a recent decline in the person's cognitive performance? In this instance, assume that an acute state of con.fusion or delirium is present. For people with a recognized dementia and existing behavior problems, delirium is often best identified when there is a rather sudden increase in frequency of the existing behavioral symptoms or the onset of new behavioral symptoms. When delirium is present, every effort must be made to identify and treat the underlying causes of the delirium. [See Delirium CAP.] The possible direct causes to be addressed include the onset of a new/acute illness, the reoccurrence of a chronic illness, or changes in medication regimen. . Behavioral problems in dementia sometimes can be relieved by medications designed for dementia. Consider consulting the physician about these medi.cations. . Could the person be trying to communicate an unmet need? Does the person have difficulty making him-or herself understood? The person may be unable to communicate stress such as the urge to urinate, have an inability to know where to go, or experience pain on urination. Similarly, a person may display a challenging behavior because he or she does not recognize a caregiver or finds the environment unfamiliar and frightening. . Does the person have other types of discomfort or needs that he or she cannot verbalize? For example, is the person disrobing in public because the clothing is too tight or uncomfortable? Is fatigue leading to lessened impulse control by the person? Is the person wandering because he or she feels the urge to urinate but is too disoriented to find a bathroom? A person partially paralyzed by a stroke may get frustrated, angry, and phys.ically aggressive when caregivers do not understand his or her attempts to communicate. A person with impaired mobility may need to be repositioned if he or she has been in the same position for a prolonged period of time. . Is the person misinterpreting the environment or actions of others? A person with memory loss may forget that he or she is married or make inappropriate advances to a member of the opposite sex. Similarly, a person with Alzheimer's disease, seeing a housekeeper straight.ening up the room and picking up clothing, may interpret the unfamiliar person as a thief. In such cases, agitation, verbal abusiveness, resistance to care, or even physical aggression may occur. . Can the behaviors of the cognitively impaired person be tolerated? For many persons with chronic progressive dementia, certain behaviors may continue despite remedial treatments or interventions. Occasionally, the behaviors will be distressing, yet often can be accommodated. For example, many persons who wander can be accommodated without restraints in a hazard-free environment. Similarly, if the needs and patterns of persons with repetitive behaviors or catastrophic reactions are anticipated, care plan strategies may be devel.oped and followed to avoid escalation of the behavior. For example, if the person becomes agitated and is known to strike out at staff during ADL care, stopping the activity at the first sign of agitation, and trying later, may prevent the striking out. Dtoes the person have a new or acute physical health problem or a flare-up of a known chronic condition that may be causing or aggravating a behavior symptom? . Conditions such as delirium, an infection, dehydration, constipation, and con.gestive heart failure are physical health problems that can cause behavior dis.turbances. [A review of the Delirium, Dehydration, and Undernutrition CAPs is warranted.] . Determine if anything interferes with the person's ability to get enough sleep (for example, light, noise, frequent vital sign checks during the night, or a roommate with different: sleep patterns). . ls the person in pain? This can result in depression, reduced mobility, social isolation, sleep disruption, and behavioral outbursts. The person may be star.tled if touched or moved in a way that aggravates the pain. If the person is receiving a pain medication or another pain management therapy, review it to find out whether it is being administered regularly and whether the dosage or intervention is enough to manage the pain without breakthrough pain. [See Pain CAP.] Could the onset or aggravation of problem behaviors be associated with medi.cation side effects? . Is the person receiving a new medication or has there been a change in dos.age? Review the length of time from the change to the onset or worsening of behavioral symptoms. . Is the person receiving any medication known to contribute to or aggravate behaviors? Common medications causing side effects leading to behavior problems include: Antiparkinsonian drugs can cause hypersexuality and socially inappropri.ate behavior, such as public masturbation or unsought sexual advances. Some medications, such as sedatives, centrally active antihypertensives, some cardiac drugs, and anticholinergic agents can cause paranoid delu.sions, induce delirium symptoms, or cause reversible cognitive damage. Bronchodilators or other drugs used to treat respiratory problems, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma, can increase agitation and cause difficulty sleeping. Too much caffeine and nicotine can also have a similar adverse side effect. Many medications and substances can impair impulse control. Examples include benzodiazepines, sedatives, alcohol, or any product containing alcohol (for example, some cough medicines). Do family members and caregivers interact appropriately with the person? The actions and responses of family members and caregivers can aggravate or even cause behavioral outbursts. . Do caregivers or family members have unrealistic expectations for what the person can do, considering the person's physical and cognitive function? If appropriate, are caregivers dividing larger tasks (such as dressing) into a string of smaller activities the person can perform? Are family members and formal caregivers aware of the person's cognitive patterns and physical functioning? Do family members or caregivers express frustration with the person? . Do family members and caregivers provide cues, reminders, and reassurance to help the person make sense of things? . Are family members and caregivers asking too many questions or making too many statements at once? A person with communication problems-either physical or cognitive-could become frustrated coping with the information provided. . Are there major unresolved sources of interpersonal conflict between the per.son and family members, other care recipients, or staff? Previous life events or dysfunctional patterns in social relationships may be an underlying cause of current behavior problems. Is a behavior management program in place? What are the key elements of the program? Review how the person has previously responded to attempts to change or alter the behavior. What was tried? How well did it work? . Is there a scheduled, at least monthly, drug regime review program involving nurses, physicians, and the pharmacist? Evaluate whether there is congruence between psychiatric diagnoses and the prescription of psychotropic drugs. Assess whether there is a need to increase the use of a drug or whether it can be tapered off. . Is there a documented behavior management program in place? Does it refer.ence how others can best approach the person so that he or she reacts appro.priately? Is there a strategy for increasing staff interactions with the person? Have staff received specific instructions on how to carry out such exchanges? Are they encouraged to enter into such exchanges, and is there a process for documenting the results? Does the program include specific behavioral ther.apy sessions led by a trained leader? Does it include structural activities? Has there been an environmental review, and have steps been taken to alter prob.lematic stimuli? . Has the program set specific improvement targets, either by changes in type of behavior, frequency of behavior, or date of expected change? Have specific changes been documented? . Does the program serving the person have access to mental health specialists for evaluations? Has the person had a mental health evaluation, if needed? . Evaluate the benefits for continuing interventions by determining whether or not the person's behavior improved over the last 90 days. . Consider what other less restrictive approaches might be used if the current intervention is stopped. . Track the person's response to a decrease or change in existing interventions, particularly changes in the use of psychotropic medications or restraints. Use of physical restraints should be considered a last resort option, if used at all. Step 3: Build onthe person's strengths. The care plan should include strategies for improving the person's quality of life by enhancing his or her personal, social, and environmental strengths. Consider areas of strength that have been evident over the person's life in addition to those that are present today. Increase the opportunities for the person to draw on his or her strengths in daily life. . When is the person comfortable and relaxed (for example, time of day, loca.tion, type of activity, social environment)? Are there factors present in these circumstances that can be used to reduce instances of problem behaviors? . Which family members or caregivers are able to engage in calm, composed interactions with the person? Speak with these individuals to learn what they find to be effective in engaging the person in activities without agitation. . What is important to the person now? What was important to the person previously? Does the person have opportunities to engage in activities that he or she values? Are there objects of sentimental value to the person, and does he or she have access to those objects (for example, photographs of family members, cards)? Be aware of cultural factors that may be a central part of the person's iden.tity. Are there events that have been important for the person to celebrate? What can be done to support interactions with the person's cultural com.munity? . Where is the person most relaxed? What features of the physical and social environment are associated with positive behavior patterns? Does the person demonstrate less agitated behavior in quiet settings, less crowded environ.ments, or environments with reduced visual stimuli? Additional Resources Fogel B. 1997. Behavioral symptoms. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Gwyther LP. 2001. Caring for persons with Alzheimer's disease: A manual for facility staff. Washington, DC: American Health Care Association and the Alzheimer's Association. Alzheimer's Association: www.alz.org Hirdes JP, Fries BE, Rabinowitz T, Morris JN. 2007. Comprehensive assessment of persons with bipolar disorder in long-term care settings: The potential of the interRAI family of instruments. In Sajatovic M, Blow FC, eds. B ipolar dis orders in late life. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Mace NL, Rabins PV. 2000. The 36-hour a day family guide to caring for persons with Alzheimer's disease, related dementing illnesses, and memory loss in later life. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Robinson A, Spencer B, White LA. 1999. Understanding difficult behaviors: Some practical suggestions for coping with Alzheimer's disease and related ill.nesses. Geriatric Education Center of Michigan, Ypsilanti, Ml. Authors Catherine Hawes, PhD John P. Hirdes, PhD John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Section 12 Abusive Relationship CAP Problem The Abusive Relationship CAP is designed to identify persons who are in situations of potential abuse or neglect, and to aid in the decisions for action. In some coun.tries and communities, reporting such cases to a designated agency is mandated. Mistreatment may be an act of commission (abuse) or omission (neglect). While in some instances it may be an intentional conscious attempt to inflict suffering, it may also be an unintentional act, a result of inadequate knowledge, infirmity, depression, burnout, or inattentiveness on the part of the caregiver. The expressions of mistreatment can be grouped under four main headings: . Physical abuse -Inflicting physical pain or injury, including sexual moles.tation. . Psychological abuse -Inflicting mental anguish, including humiliation and intimidation. . Neglect -Failure to fulfill a caregiving duty, including, for example, the denial of food, health related services, or abandonment. . Financial abuse -The improper or illegal use of funds and assets. It is imperative to respond to evidence of abuse. Persons who experience abuse may be at immediate risk of injury or other serious health problems. In addition, abuse affects other aspects oftlife, including psychological well-being, social participation, and community involvement. An ongoing concern, even after abuse has ceased, is the risk of post-traumatic stress disorder, which may include serious psychi.atric symptoms such as severe depression and recurrence of suicidal ideation (suicidality). Overall Goals of Care е Evaluate the capacity of the person to decide about his or her own welfare, and to have an un.derstanding of lhe consequences of those decisions. е Delermine the leveJ of risk lo the person. е Determine the need for immediate intervenlions, such as social services, medical care, court orders for protection, or relocation of the person. е Monitor for long-term mental health consequences related to abuse. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Abusive Relationship CAP Trigger This CAP identifies persons of all ages who are in situations of neglect or abuse, or who are at substantial risk of either. The short-term goal is to decide whether the situation requires immediate action, while the medium-to long-term goal is to manage psychosocial consequences arising from a history of abuse. Research sug.gests that about one-third of the persons who trigger this CAP will no longer trigger it 90 days later. However, there is a persistent risk over the life course of depression, anxiety, and impaired social function if the psychological consequences of abuse are not addressed effectively. TRIGGERED -HIGHEST RISK STATUS This subgroup includes persons who meet both of the following criteria: . One or more of the following direct indicators of abuse are present: Fearful of a family member, caregiver, or close acquaintance Unusually poor hygiene, unkempt or disheveled appearance Neglected, abused, or mistreated . Two or more of the following "stressors" are present: Depression -Depression Rating Scale score of 3 or higher Poor nutrition -includes any of following: substantial recent weight loss, malnutrition, the consumption of one or fewer meals a day, insufficient fluid intake, body mass index ofless than 19, or a decrease in food eaten Anger or conflict with family or friends Health issues -not in full compliance with medication regimen, medically unstable, or self-rated health is poor Residential setting judged to be unable to meet needs and it would be best if the person moved Caregiver is distressed, angry, or depressed Social isolation -withdrawal from activities, reduced social interaction, or expression of loneliness About 2 to 6% of persons (of all ages) receiving home care and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community will be triggered in the "Highest Risk Status:' TRIGGERED -MODERATE RISK ST A TUS This subgroup includes persons who meet only the first of the two above criteria; that is, they have one or more of the direct indicators of abuse and do not have two or more stressors. About 1 to 6% of persons receiving home care and less than 1 % of older adults liv.ing independently in the community will be triggered in the "Moderate Risk Status:' NOT TRIGGERED This group includes all other persons. Abusive Relationship CAP Guidelines Is the behavior abusive? In determining whether a behavior is abusive, neglect.ful, or exploitive, the frequency, duration, severity, and likely consequences of the observations should be assessed. 1n addition, both the objective circumstances surrounding the behavior and the person's view of the situation should be consid.ered. Does he or she see it as abusive? Is he or she receptive to a corrective course of action? Are there cultural factors that result in acceptance of the behavior or that make the person less willing to respond? . For the "Highest Ri sk Status" subgroup there is a high likelihood of the presence of abuse with imminent physical or mental health concerns. For these persons, consider the following factors: Is there a history of violence, abuse, neglect, or exploitation by the care.giver, including physical abuse of others? Are formal services being provided at an adequate, reliable level? Are agency staff aware of the issue and have steps been taken to address the recognized problems? Should the person be removed from the abusive environment immediately? Does the caregiver and family understand the abuse and are they willing to try to correct the problems? Is substance abuse an issue for the person or for the caregiver? Are there immediate mental health concerns that place the person at risk of harm to self or others? . For the "Moderate Risk Status" subgroup, you should screen further for possible abuse and neglect. While abuse or neglect may be suspected, this may not always be true. There are a variety of reasons why initial indicators of abuse are in fact explained by other factors. For example, the caregiver (or others) may be falsely accused of abuse because of mental health problems experienced by the person. Sometimes a person with cognitive impairment may not recall the benign cause of a bruise. In evaluating potential abuse without supporting indicators, alternative explanations should be considered. However, the assessment of the situation should be as thorough as possible to ensure that cases of actual abuse are not inadvertently discounted. Particular attention should be given to The immediate and long-term context of the presenting problem (for example, is there a family history of abuse?) The risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation (for example, how vulnerable is the person, and are there clear power inequalities between the person and the caregiver?} The severity and frequency of the problem The immediacy of the risk (for example, what is the likelihood of immediate harm to the person in the present environment?) The caregiver's perspective (for example, does the caregiver feel that he or she is part of the problem?) Cultural factors that may be barriers to identifying or responding to abuse Interview the person in a nonthreatening manner. The discussion should occur with the person alone (not in the presence of the alleged or possible abuser), although at first it may not be possible to do so. The person's confirmation of the mistreatment is an important factor in deciding the nature of further action. Ask the person to describe his or her feelings about the abusive event(s). Does the per.son describe the event(s) as inducing an intense feeling of fear or horror? What is the person's response to other severe life events? When the person denies mistreat.ment, you must make a decision about its validity. Investigate the potential abuse. To decide if abuse is present, it may be advis.able to obtain information from health or social service professionals, relatives, and service providers. An interview with the individual suspected of being abusive (if appropriate) can be helpful in developing asuccessful intervention strategy. Explain to the caregiver that part of the regular interview process is talking to the caregiver separately from the person. When doing this, evaluate the goodwill, health, mental and emotional status, and competency of the caregiver. It may be difficult to assess the extent of financial abuse in the absence ofdetailed information on financial resources, spending patterns, and cultural and fam.ily norms. Although the need to make difficult economic tradeoffs (for example, among health care, prescribed medications, heating, food) may occur with some cases of financial abuse, not all economic tradeoffs are due to abuse and not all per.sons who are financially abused are forced to make economic tradeoffs. Treatment. The response to abuse, neglect, or exploitation will vary according to individual cases, the severity of the abuse or its potential, and the laws of a juris.diction. Often social service agencies can work with a caregiver to lessen or miti.gate factors that contribute to possible abuse or neglect. Homemaking services and respite care can help in allowing the caregiver time away from the person. The stressors referenced for those at highest risk are all highly prevalent prob.lems. Many have associated CAPs that should be considered. . About two-thirds ofthose triggered will have health problems, including ADL and cognitive impairment. . One-half will have problems in the areas of social isolation, depression, anxi.ety, loss of pleasure in life (anhedonia}, and anger or conflict with family. . About 30% will have poor nutrition, identified to be in need of relocation, or have informal caregivers who are distressed, angry, or depressed. Relevant Clinical Assessment Protocols to be considered to assist in resolving these problems include Social Relationship, Activities, Informal Support, Mood, Behavior, Dehydration, Cognitive Loss, and Undernutrition. In constructing a plan of care, the following issues should be addressed: . Is the person in immediate physical danger? If so, immediate action must be taken to address the problems. This might include steps to immediately remove the person from the present environment. Consider the potential reaction of the abusive individual and how he or she may respond to this move, as well as that of the person being abused. . Will the person accept the intervention? . Does the abusive individual acknowledge his or her role and will he or she accept entry into a therapeutic program? . Will providing (more) formal direct care services lead to an improvement in the situation? . Would the caregiver benefit from counseling or medical treatment to helpbear the present burden? . If the allegations of abuse appear to be unsubstantiated, would the person benefit from counseling or psychiatric assessment and treatment? . Is the person showing indications of post-traumatic stress in relation to the abuse? If so, it may be necessary to make a referral for appropriate psychiatric care. Follow-up and monitoring. Periodic reassessment is needed in all cases, especially when the evidence of abuse is inconclusive. Even if a person refuses help, it may still be beneficial to provide written information about emergency assistance numbers and suitable referrals. For persons who have had the Abusive Relationships CAP triggered in a previous assessment, it is important to monitor for signs of mental health problems even if the CAP is no longer triggered. There might be new information available that will help assure the presence or absence of abuse. In addition, conditions that were antecedents or precipitating factors in prior episodes of abuse should be observed for and addressed if their recurrence is noted. Additional Resources Clearinghouse on Abuse and Neglect of the Elderly (CANE): www.cane.udel.edu Ontario Network for the Prevention of Elder Abuse: www.onpea.org Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW John P. Hirdes, PhD 