About the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) System Introduction The interRAI Contact Assessment (interRAI CA) is an initial, screening level assessment instrument that provides preliminary information to support the home care assessment intake processes. The interRAI CA is designed as a home and community care intake system for persons screened in the community or hospital (including the emergency department). The interRAI CA should always be done electronically to ensure that the assessors receive instantaneous results for the clini.cal algorithms, scales, and indicators embedded in the interRAI CA. The interRAI CA is based on measures that are fully compatible with the broader suite of internationally used interRAI instruments. It promotes a continuous, per.son-centred approach to care that enhances the coordination and collaboration of health care and social service organizations across the continuum of care. е The interRAI CA is not a substitute for comprehensive interRAI assessments. It records only the essential clinical information about the person needed at intake to inform immediate decisions regarding the need for more comprehensive assess.ment, the urgency for home support service provision, the need for different types of services (for example, rehabilitation, personal support workers). The interRAI CA е does not provide care planning protocols like the interRAI Home Care (HC),1 but it does provide important clinical information that is needed for service provision. Description of the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) Purpose The interRAI CA provides information to support the home and community care intake process with the following key objectives: . Identify persons requiring comprehensive assessment based on indicators of disability, frailty, cognitive impairment, mental health, caregiver issues, and medical problems; . Provide the minimum clinical information relevant to short-term services as well as those that must be initiated prior to completion of a full interRAI assessment; . Identify potential need for specific services, such as rehabilitation, nursing, and personal support; . Identify the level of urgency for completion of comprehensive assessments and for initiation of home and community services; and . Record basic clinical information for persons with less complex needs who may not receive a comprehensive assessment at a later stage. This includes persons who may only receive short-term nursing procedures (for example, post-surgical wound care, IV medications) as well as those seeking services the organization does not normally provide (for example, referral to a volun.teer-based organization for transportation or friendly visiting). Completing the interRAI Contact Assessment The interRAI CA is designed to be used with a variety of intake scenarios includ.ing, for example, in-personscreening in hospitals (including the emergency depart.ment) and telephone-based interviews. The interRAI CA can be completed by reg.ulated health professionals (for example, nuerses, social workers), but it could also be completed accurately by non-regulated intake staff with appropriate training. The interRAI CA can be done with mueltiple informants (for example, prospective clients, spouses, children, health professionals) who contact your organization for a variety of purposes (for example, some people may specifically request support services whereas others needing support services may only initially ask for informa.tion). The needs of the person can be expected to include those explicitly stated by informants, as well as previously unerecognized problems. The interRAI CA is designed to be used as a multi-step process of documentation and decision making. The standard recommended sequence of screening with the CA is described below; however, some countries may use different initial screening criteria when completing the CA. -. Section A documents demographic information, health care identifiers, and the reason(s) for refereral. . Section B captures information about the referral details and the person's liv.ing arrangements. . Section C comprises the preliminary screener that should be completed for all persons screened with the CA. It includes items used in the Assess.ment Urgency Algorithm (see below), which differentiates persons who do not require further scereening or assessment from those who require further evaluation. The screening items and algoerithms from this section combined with clinical judgment are used to decide whether to complete the remaining sections of theCA. If services are judged to be required (or possibly required), sections D and E must be completed. If not, the remainder of the assessment would not be completed. (Note: Some countries may specify an alternate pre.liminary screening approach based on countery-specific eligibility criteria.) . Section D contains all remaining items needed to derive additional clinical decision-support scales and algorithms as well as additional clinical informa.tion about persons who require only short-term services. . Section E records summarey information regarding clinical decisions and tehe sources of information used to complete the CA. Using Decision Support Algorithms in the interRAI CA Even though the interRAI CA is not a comprehensive assessment instrument with associated care planning protocols like the interRAI Home Care (HC), it includes several decision-support algorithms that can inform important choices made dur.ing the intake process. These decision-support tools should be considered when you think about appropriate supports and services for the person. However, they should not be used as automated decision-making rules. Rather, they should be dis.cussed in a shared decision-making approach that fully engages the person and their support network in formulating a plan of action that takes into account all considerations that pertain to the person's strengths, preferences, and needs. The table below describes the currently available decision-support tools in the interRAI CA and how they may be used. . The Self-Reliance Index is a descriptive indicator that identifies the presence of ADL or cognitive impairments. It differentiates the persons screened into those who are self-reliant in all five ADLs and cognition from those who are impaired in one or more of those areas. . The Assessment Urgency Algorithm is used to prioritize the need and urgency for a comprehensive follow-up assessment (for example, interRAI HC). It has also been shown to be a predictor of hospital admissions and delayed discharge among persons admitted to acute hospitals from emergency departments. . The Service Urgency Afgorithm is used to identify persons who may be in urgent need of clinical services (for example, wound care, IV medication). . The Rehabilitation Algorithm is used to identify persons who may be candi dates for rehabilitation services, specifically physiotherapy and occupational therapy. . The Personal Support Algorithm is used to prioritize access to personal sup.port services and to inform the amount of personal support services provided. . The Distressed Mood Scale Self-Report is a measure of psychological well.being based on the frequency of indicators of dysphoria, anhedonia, and anxiety. . The Pain Scale is used to measure the severity and frequency of pain symptoms. . The Changes in Health, End-stage disease, and Signs and Symptoms (CHESS-CA) scale is a measure of health instability that predicts mortality and acute hospital use. Since not all of the original items for this algorithm are present in the CA, CHESS-CA is a slightly abbreviated version of CHESS used in the interRAI Home Care assessment. Nonetheless, direct comparisons can be made between score results from the CHESS and CHESS-CA. Table 1. interRAI Contact Assessment Scales and Algorithms SRI Self-Reliance Index AVA Assessment Urgency Algorithm SUA Service Urgency Algorithm Rehab Rehabilitation Algorithm Algorithm PSA Personal Support Algorithm Daily decision making (Cl) Bathing (C2a) Bath transfer ( C2b) Personal hygiene ( C2c) Dressing lower body (C2d) Locomotion (C2e) Daily decision making (Cl) Bathing (C2a) Bath transfer ( C2b) Personal hygiene ( C2c) Dressing lower body (C2d) Locomotion (C2e) Dyspnea (C3) Self-reported health (C4) Sad, depressed, hopeless (C5c) Unstable conditions (C6a) Family overwhelmed (D19b) Daily decision making (Cl) Bathing (C2a) Bath transfer ( C2b) Personal hygiene (C2c) Dressing lower body (C2d) Locomotion (C2e) Daily pain (D8a) IV therapy (Dl4b) Wound care (Dl4e) Last hospital stay (Dl5) Emergency department visits (D16) Daily decision making (Cl) Bathing (C2a) Bath transfer ( C2b) Personal hygiene (C2c) Dressing lower body (C2d) Locomotion (C2e) Meal preparation (D3a) Ordinary housework (D3b) Medication management (D3c) Stair use (D3d) ADL decline (D4) Referral to initiate or continue palliative services (B2c) Daily decision making (Cl) Bathing (C2a) Bath transfer ( C2b) Personal hygiene (C2c) Dressing lower body (C2d) Locomotion (C2e) ----.-.-.---.сссссссссссссссссссссс-ссс-ссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс Binary variable scored as "self-reliant" or "not self-reliant" based on impairment in any one of five functional areas or cognitive problems. Used in calculation of several CA scales. Decision tree-based algorithm (see appendix) with scores ranging from 1 (least) to 6 (highest) urgency of comprehensive assessment. Persons with higher scores should be prioritized for comprehensive assessment with the interRAl HC (or equivalent). Standard cut-points are , medium urgency: 3-4 and high urgency: 5-6. Persons with an AVA score of 1-2 in the preliminary screener do not require completion of full interRAl CA unless deemed necessary by clinician. Scores on the AVA done at intake have been shown to be strongly associated with Method for Assigning Priority Levels (MAPLe) scores done in in-person assessments by regulated health professionals using the е interRAl HC. Decision tree-based algorithm (see appendix) with scores ranging from 1 (low) to 4 (high) urgency for initiating home care services. This algorithm focuses on medical needs that must be addressed rapidly (e.g., initiation or continuation of wound care or IV therapy). Scores of 3 or 4 are indicative of persons likely to need home and community services within the next 72 hours or less. Decision tree-based algorithm (see appendix) with scores ranging from 1 (low) to 5 (high) determining the need for rehabilitation services. The majority of persons with a score of 3 or more receive some physical or occupational therapy in the community and those with scores of 5 receive the most follow-up visits. Decision tree-based algorithm (see appendix) with scores ranging from 1 (low) to 6 (high) for need for personal support services (e.g., homemaking, home health aide). Persons with higher scores are more likely to receive these services at higher volumes; however, the absolute Abbreviation or Acronym PSA (continued) OMS-Self-report PAIN CHESS-CA Scale Distressed Mood Scale-Self-report Pain Scale Changes in Health, End-stage disease, and Signs and Symptoms Items in the Scale Unstable conditions (C6a) Acute episode/flare-ups ( C6b) Understand others (D2) Meal preparation (D3a) Ordinary housework (D3b) Medication management (D3c) Stair use (03d) Caregiver distressed (D19a) Caregiver overwhelmed (D19b) Self-reported mood items: Loss of interest (C5a) Anx ious, restless, uneas. y (C5b) Sad, depressed, hopeless ( C5c) Pain frequency (D8a) Pain intensity (D8b) Referral for palliative services (B2c) Dyspnea (Shortness of breath) (C3) Change in decision making (D1) Change in AOL status (D4) Peripheral edema (D7c) Vomiting (D7d) Decrease in the amount of food or fluid usually consumed (DlOa) Unintended weight loss (DlOb) Interpretation of Scores amount of services can vary by jurisdiction. Thosewith scores of 3-4 are likely to have moderate need for personal support services, whereas those with scores of 5-6 have high needs. Additive scale with scores ranging from 0 (no indicators) to 9 (high) with higher scores indicating more severely distressed mood. Scores of 3 or more are associated with a greater likelihood of a mood disorder diagnosis. Scores of 5 or more are associated with higher risk of self -harm behaviours. Persons with scores of 3 should be considered to have higher need for comprehensive assessment (since their AUA scores are also likely to be high). Persons with scores of 5 or more should be considered for referral to appropriate mental health services. Additive scale with scores from O (no pain) to 4 (daily excruciating pain). Scores of 2 or more include persons with daily pain of any intensity.The pain scale is used in full interRAI assessments to trigger care planning protocols, and it can be used as an outcome measure to track the person's needs over time. If the person has a pain score of 3 or more, the person should be prioritized for more urgent follow-up with home nursing services or should be referred to primary care. Additive scale with scores from O (no indicators) to 5 (very high) indicating the degree of instability in health. Persons with higher scores have greater risk of death, hospitalization, or emergency department visits. Persons with scores of 3 or more should be prioritized for urgent follow-up with home nursing services and should be referred to primary care. About one-third of those with a CHESS-CA score of 4 are hospit alized within 90 days. Over half of those with scores of 5 on the CHESS-CA have been shown to die wit hin 90 days. еееееееееееееееrеееrеееrеееrеееrеееrеееееееееееееее__..........-__..........-__..........-.,.........-.,.........-.,..........-.,.........-.,......-.-.,......-.-.,......-.-.......-.The interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) and the Suite of interRAI Assessments The interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) has been designed to be compatible with other interRAI assessment and problem-identification tools, particularly the interRAI Home Care (HC), the RAI Home Care, the interRAI Community Health Assessment (CHA), and the interRAI Acute Care (AC). Additionally, the interRAI CA is compatible with other internationally used interRAI instruments, such as the instruments for community and inpatient mental health, long-term care facilities, paleliative care, and post-acute care. This compatibility advances the continuity of care through a "seamless" assessment system across multiple health care settings and promotes a person-centred evaluation rather than fragmented site-specific assessments. When an interRAI CA is completed, it becomes part of the person's longitudinal clinical record based on the interRAI assessments completed during their contact with health and social services. The scales and algorithms from the interRAI CA can be used as point-in-time outcome measures to help track changes in the person's health and well-being over time. The interRAI CA should be shared with clinicians completing more comprehensive follow-up assessments like the interRAI Home Care or Acute Care, because the CA information might provide useful evidence for completing subsequent assessments. For example, if the person was cognitively intact on the CA but shows signs of cognitive impairment when the HC is done, this evidence is helpful in two ways. First, it provides a longitudinal reference point for the next clinician to use when coding the second assessment's item on cognitive decline. Second, the clinical evidence provided by two assessments that suggest a change in cognitive status is highly relevant to need identification and care planning at the time of the second assessment. In other words, sharing the inter RAJ CA with other clinicians in the circle of care A is essential to support accurate measurement and good quality of care. However, it is important to emphasize that the interRAI CA should not be used to automati.cally carry forward item scores to subsequent assessments. The CA is a screening level assessment done at one point in time in circumstances that are potentially not as accurate as a follow-up assessment done at a point more distant to the potential acute experience documented in the CA. Approaching the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) System Use of the interRAI CA Form The interRAI CA Form (see Appendices) is a standardized, minimum screening level assessment designed to inform initial clinical decision making. It provides essential information needed at the first point of contact with a person seeking home and community care services. It is not intended to be the sole source of evidence about the person's strengths, preferences, and needs over their full episode of care. The items in the interRAeI CA measure a person's objective performance and capacity in a variety of areas, with many of the items serving to inform decision.support algorithms. The Assessment Urgency Algorithm (see above) calculated from the interRAI CA is an important tool that identifies the need for a more detailed follow-up assessment with an instrument like the interRAI HC. Persons with moderate or higher scores on the AVA (3+) should receive the full inter RAJ HC assessment (or equivalent). Persons with lower scores should also receive the full assessment where it is warranted in the clinician's judgment. As noted earlier, interRAI designed the CA to be used by a broad range of staff in home and community care. However, countrye-specific guidelines or regulatory requirements should be taken into account when identifying who in your organiza.The following key points apply to completion of the interRAI CA: . The interRAI CA Form consists of items with specific definitions. It should be used as a guide to structure the flow of the assessment. . The interRAI CA does not provide a fixed narrative of words that must be used when assessing each item. Instead, it is a guide for how assessors should approach their interviews, observations, and discussion with the person and other informants. It is a.ssumed that all persons completing interRAI assess.ments, including the CA, have appropriate training and expertise in cultural competency. You are free to adapt your interview questions to ensure they are asked in a manner that is culturally appropriate for the person being assessed. You must understand the intent, definitions, and assessment processes for each CA item yourself; however, you can adapt examples or terminology to fit the person's cultural needs during your interview. . The assessment process requires communication with the person and the primary support individual(еs) (if available), observation of the person (where possible), communication with other members of the clinical team, and review of medical records and other available documents. Where possible, the person is the primary source of information. If the CA is being completed remotely (for example, telephone or video conference) you should still try to engage other individuals as potential sources of information when appropriate. In addition, video-based tech.nologies are preferable over telephone because they can allow for visual observations of the person and their environment. е . Items are presented in a reasonable sequence that could be followed during the assessment. However, the assessor is not bound by the sequence within sections of the interRAI CA. Items may be reviewed in any order that works best for the person and the assessor. . Sometimes assessors must reconcile multiple sources of information yield.ing seemingly inconsistent results (for example, the person being assessed may report something that is very different from the response of the person's spouse). In this case, assessors must use their clinical judgment to determine the most appropriate response for the particular item. . Assessors should talk in private with each informant whenever possible. Basic Principles of the interRAI CA . The goal of any interRAI assessment is to provide evidence that can help to maximize the person's functional capacity and quality of life by address.ing their physicael and mental heaelth problems, е and enhancing their level of independence. To do this requires: identifying the purpose of the assessmeent. In the case of the interRAI CA, the aim is to obtain basic, screening level information to identify immedi.ate needs for services that must be initiated urgently and to identify per.sons with complex needs that require a more comprehensive assessment; е е identifying functional, medical, and social issues that presently (or likely will) limit the person'sindependence and quality of life;е identifying the person's strengths, preferences, and assets; and integrating what you see and hear to code accurately each of the interRAI е CA items . .....--.....---.....---.....--.-....... . When introducing the interRAI CA to a person, you should emphasize that the assessment is an integral part of the overall service program. Address the person directly whenever possible. When talking with others, it is not neces.sary to use the word "person;е which is used in the interRAI CA form and manual to provide a consistent reference throughout. You can substitute words such as "older person;е "patient;' or "client:' You can also use phrases such as "Mrs. X" or "your mother:е . Do not expect that all functional, medical, and social matters identified will be fully and comprehensively addressed immedieately. Rather, the CA focuses on issues requiring urgent attention. This will allow short-term service plans to be established to deal with immediate needs followed by more detailed care plans to be developed based on a comprehensive assessment like the interRAI HC (or equivalent). . If there is evidence o.f abuse or neglect, referral to an appropriate agency/ authority and immediate intervention may be warranted in accordance with the laws of your local jurisdiction. . Any acute medical matter shoueld be brought to the attention of the person immediately, and the person should be helped in obtaining appropriate med.ical care. As would be expected in standard practice, instances of risk of harm to self or others warrant special and immediate intervention. How to Use This Manual Use this manual alongsidee tlhe interRAI CA software while always keeping the form available. During training you may wish to access the form in hardcopy or elec.tronic format, but the assessment itself should always be completed electronically to fully benefit from the embedded decision-support tools. The assessment form itself contains a wealth of information. Learn to rely on the form and the manual until you internalize the item definitions and procedural instructions necessary for accurate assessment. The information about definiitеons and coding processes in this manual should be reviewed in detail prior to completing your first interRAI CA assessment. Keep the manual handy so you can continue to refer to it as questions arise when completing assessments. The initial time investment in this multi-step review process will have a major payback. The guidelines that follow summarize the recommended approach to becoming familiar with the interRAI CA assessment process. Becoming Familiar with the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) Process First, review the interRAI CA Form itself. . Note how sections are organized and where information is to be recorded. . Work through one section at a time. Examine item definitions and response options. Review procedural instructions, time frames, and general coding conventions. . Are the item definitions and instructions clear? Do they differ from your agency's current practice? What areas require further clarification? Next, complete a sample interRAI CA Form for a person who is well known to you. . Draw only on your existing knowledge of this person. Enter the appropriate codes on the form. . Note where your assessment could benefit from additional information. How might you secure specific information? By asking the person? By talking with the family? Next, complete an initial pass through Part II, "Item-by-Item Guide to the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) Form'.' . Part II includes: . the intent of items on the interRAI CA For.. m; . supplemental definitions and instructions for completing interRAI CA items; and . sources of information to be consulted for specific items. . The standard observation period for the CA is 24hours, but exceptions to that е are noted in the form and manuasl. . As you read the item definitions, review questions that arose as you used the interRAI CA to assess a person for the first time. Note sections of this manual that help to clarify any coding and procedural questions you may have had. . Read the instructions that apply to each section of the interRAI CA Form. Make sure you understand the information before going on to another sec.tion. Review the test case you completed. Would you still code it the same? It will take time to go through all this material. Do not rush. Work through the interRAI CA one section at a time to make sure you thoroughly understand .. . the definitions and instructions. е . Are any of the interRAI CA item definitions, instructions, or case examples unclear to you? For example, do you understand how to code "Activities of daily living" (AD Ls) or "Self-reported mood"? If you are uncertain, engage a colleague with interRAI-related expertise in a discussion about the item or reach out to other educational resources with that expertise for clarification.е . Do any definitions or instructions differ from what you thought you leaе rned when you first reviewed the interRAI CA Form? Would you now complete your initial case differently? "'. Do any item definitions or instructions differ from current practice patterns or terminology used in your agency/organization? Complete the items on the ' interRAI CA using the definitions and guidelines provided in the manual to ensure that you adhere to the interRAI standard for these measures.... . Are there cultural factors unique to the persons you assess that may influ.ence how you should phrase questions related to specific interRAI CA items? When needed, discuss your approach with advisers who have expertise in the specific cultural considerations in question. . Make notations next to anything you have questions about. Be prepared to discuss these issues during any formal training program you attend. . This manual will serve as a reference as long as you are using the interRAI CA Form. Use it on an ongoing basis to increase the accuracy and quality of your assessments. Item-by-Item Guide to the interRAI Contact Assessment (CA) Form Section A. Demographic Information 13 Section B. Intake and Initial History 21 Section C. Preliminary Screener 27 Section D. Clinical Evaluation 37 Section E. Summary 55 Section cI Preliminary Screener Section C contains items used in a decision-making algorithm to differentiate per.sons who do not requiree further screening or assessment from those who are likely to benefit from further evaluation. Based on the results of the screening items in this section, a decision is made about completing or not completing the remainder of the interRAI CA. C1. Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making Intent To record the person's actual performance in making everyday decisions about the tasks or activities of daily living. These items are especially important for further assessment and care plannin.g in that they can alert the assessor to a mismatch between... a person's abilities and their current level of performance. This may indi.cate that caregivers or others (for example, family) are inadvertently fostering the person's dependence. Definition Here are some examples of decision-making tasks: . choosing items of clothing; . knowing when to eat meals; . knowing and using space in the home appropriately; . using environmental cues {such as clocks, calendars, or posted listing of upcoming events) to organize and plan the day; . in the absence of environmental cues, seeking information appropriately (that is, not repetitively) from others in order to plan the day; . using awareness of one's own strengths and limitations in regulating the day's events (for example, asking for help when necessary); . making prudent decisions concerning how to get to places; or . where applicable, acknowledging the need to use a walker or other assistive device, and using it faithfully. Process Interview and observe the person and consult with others (for example, a family member), where possible and necessary. The inquiry should focus on whether the person is actively making decisions about how to manage tasks of daily living, and not whether others believe that the person might be capable of doing so. Remember the intent of this item is to record what the person is doing (actual performance). When someone takes decision-making responsibility away from the person regard.ing tasks of everyday living, or when the person does not participate in decision making (whatever their level of capability may be), the person should be considered as having impaired performance in decision making. .. This item also requires you to differentiate between (1) the lack of ability to participate in decision making or the lack of opportunity to make decisions and (2) making decisions that others may not agree with (for example, refusingсссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс сссссссссссс сссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс -сссссссссс Coding (2. Intent Definitions treatments, refusing to have a shower). The latter would not be considered impair.ment if the person was actively involved in making the decision. Enter the code that most accurately characterizes the person's cognitive perfor.mance in making decisions regarding the tasks of daily life in the last 24 hours. 0 Independent-The person's decisions for organizing daily routine were consis.tent, reasonable, and safe (reflecting lifestyle, culture, values). 1 Some butnotsevereimpairment-Refers to any ofthe following situations: е the person organized their daily routine and made safe decisions in familiar situations but experienced some decision-making difficulty when faced with new tasks or situations only; е in specific situations, the person's decisions were poor or unsafe, with cues/ supervision necessary at those times; е the person's decisions were consistently poor or unsafe; the person required reminders, cues, or supervision at all times to plan, organize, and conduct daily routines. 2 Severely impaired-The person never or rarely makes decisions: е the person's decision making was severely impaired; the person never (or rarely) made decisions; or е the person was non-responsive. Activities of Daily Living (AOL) Self-Performance To provide a brief screen of the person's functioning related to everyday activities during the last 24 hours. This screening addresses some, but not all, activities of daily living (AD Ls). ADLs (activities of daily living)-Activities performed for self-care, such as bath.ing, dressing, eating, toileting, ambulation, grooming, etc. The interRAI CA uses five ADL items. C2a. Bathing-How the person takes a full-body bath or shower and how each part of the body is bathed: arms, upper and lower legs, chest, abdomen, and perinea! area. Exclude washing of back and hair as well as transfers in/ out of bath or shower. C2b. Bath transfer-How the person transfers in and out of bath or shower. C2c. Personal hygiene -How the person manages personal hygiene, including combing hair, brushing teeth, shaving, applying makeup, washing and dry .ing face and hands. Exclude baths and showers. C2d. Dressing lower bodys-How the person dresses and undresses (street clothes, underwear) from the waist down, including prostheses, orthotics, belts, pants, skirts, shoes, fasteners, etc. C2e. Locomotion-How the person moves between locations on the same floor (walking or wheeling). If the person uses a wheelchair, this measures self.sufficiency once they are in the chair. Set-up help -Assistance characterized by the provision of articles, devices, or preparation necessary for the person's self-performance of an activity. This includes Process Coding giving or holding out an item the person takes from the helper, if the helper then leaves the person alone to complete the activity. If someone remains nearby to watch over the person, the person is receiving oversight, thus the score would be "1" for "Supervision or some physical assistance by others''. Following are a few examples of set-up help. For "Bathing'; it might mean placing bathing articles at the bath side. For "Bath transfer'; it might mean ensuring bath transfer equipment is in place and secure. For "Personalhygiene'; set-up help might mean providing a wash.basin or grooming articles. For "Dressing lower body: set-up help might involve retrieving and laying out clothes for the person. For "Locomotion'; it might take the form of handing the person a walker or walking stick. There are many ways to elicit this information, and е the assessor's interview skills are of great importance. There is no set order forthe questions, and the following sug.gestions may provide guidance. The person can be asked a general question such as, "How are you managing in general with your personal care?'' and should be asked to think about the last 24 hours when answering. The person could be asked if they need any help when bathing (that is, a bath or shower). Ifthe response to "needing help with the last bath" is "no;' there is no need to obtain further information about bathing. If the response is "yes;е the person shouеld be asked, "What kind of help did you need?" If the person reports needing anything more than set-up help, code "l" is appropriate. If the person had more than one bath in the last 24 hours, code for the most dependent episode. If the person did not have a bath in the last 24-hour period, the last bath they had would apply. Ifthe person is unable to recallwhen they last had a bath and no other source of information is available, professional judgment should be used to determine the amount of assistance the person likely required to complete a bath or shower. This process can be repeatedto obtain information about bath transfer, personal -hygiene, dressing lower body, and locomotion. The information could be obtained in a similar fashion from the family member or friend who initiated the call. For a hospital-based assessment, a review of the clinical record and discussion with staff can be helpful in completing the ADL section. If assistive devices are used, they should be included in the assessment of ADLs (for example, the person who walks independently with a cane would be assessed as е "O" for "Independent or set-up help only"). Codethe most dependent episode for each ADL, considering all occurrences of the activity over the last 24 hours and based on the person's actual performance, not what the person should or could do. 0 Independent or set-up help only-No assistance or supervision required in any episode, or an article or device was provided or placed within reach of the person, but no episode with supervision or physical assistance was required (that is, the person could be left unattended to complete the task on their own). 1 Supervision or some physical assistance by others-Oversight, supervision, or cueing was required for the person to be able to complete the activity, or any A е type of physical assistance, including guided maneuvering of limbs (guiding a limb without supporting it), or any amount of weight-bearing support from one or more people. 2 Total dependence -Full performance by others during entire period. Examples of How to Code AOL Self-Performance Bathing When Mr. D was asked by the assessor if he could manage to bathe, he said: "I don't need any help with having a bath; the last one I had was 3 days ago and even though! fell while getting out of the bath, I didn't hurt myself' Code: C2a = "O" ="Independent or set-up help only" Mr. D did not have a bath in the last 24 hours, so the coding is based on the most recent incident. Bath transfer 'When asked by the assessor to describe her bathing routine, Mrs. G tells the assessor she takes a bath every Tuesday and Friday when her daughter comes over to visit. While she doesn't need help bathing, she likes to have her daughter place the bath transfer bench in the tub and make sure it is secure. "I had a fall once trying to get into the tub and it really scared me:' Today is Wednesday. Code: C2b = "O" = "Lndependent or set-up help on.. ly" By placing the transfer bench in her tub, Mrs. G's daughter provides set-up help for het bath transfers. Personal hygiene Mr. X shaves himself with an electric razor, washes his face and hands, brushes his teeth, and combs his hair. His wife sets ouL all of Lhe grooming ankles and returns Lhe articles to their proper location once he is finished. She does not need t<> remain with him while he tends to his personal hygiene as long as everything is set out for him. TI1is routine was followed on Lhe morning of the intake. Code: C2c ="0"= "Independent or set-up help only'' Mr. X required set-up help only for personal hygiene in the last 24 hours. Dressing lower body Mrs. B requires daily assista,nce to put on her anti-embolic {pressure) stockings and to.... remove them at bedtime. Her daughter assi,sts each morning and every evening. Mrs. Bis independent in Lhe remainder of the tasks associated with dressing the lower body. This has been the routine in the last 24 hours as well. Code: C2d = "1" = "Supervision or some physical assistance by others" Mrs. B required physical assistance to dress her lower body in the last 24 hours. Mr. Fis completely dependent on others to put on his shoes, socks, underwear, and trou.sers. The task is always performed by a family member or a home support staff member. Code: C2d е = "2" = "Total dependence" Mr. F was totally dependent in the Last 24 liours. Locomotion Mr. U ambulates independently around his apartment and on the floor of his housing complex while socializing wiUt others and atlendlng activities (dancing and yoga). How... ever, last night he was dizzy and thought be might faint when he went to the bathroom, so his wife walked wilh him. Code: C2e = "1" = "Supervision or some physical assistance by others" The supervision that Mrs. U provided (walking with her husband to the bathroom) in the (3. Dyspnea (Shortness of Breath) Intent Definition Process Coding (4. Intent Definition Process Coding To document the presence of shortness of breath and the circumstances leading to dyspnea. Dyspnea-The person has reported being, or has been observed .. to be, breathless or "short of breath'.' Ask the person if they have experienced shortness of breath. Other expressions for shortness of breath that can be used include: "winded;' "difficulty getting your breath;' "experiencing breathlessness;е "unable to catch your breath'.' Ifthe answer is affirmative, determine if the symptom occurred with strenuous activity, during nor.mal day-to-day activity, or when resting. Ifthe person is unable to respond, review the clinical record and consult with the referring source, other clinicians, and the person's family. Select the appropriate code from the list below. Code for the most severe occur.rence during the last 24hours. Ifthe symptom was absent over the last 24 hours but would have been present had the person undertaken activity, code according to the activity level (day-to-day or moderate) that would normally have caused the per.son to experience shortness of breath. "Moderate activities" include some type of physical exercise, such as wal!king a long distance, climbing two flights of stairs, or gardening. "Normal day-to-day activities" include all ADLs (bathing, transferring, etc.) and IADLs (meal preparation, shopping, etc.). 0 Absence of symptom I Absent at rest, but present when performed moderate activities 2 Absent at rest, but present when performed normal day-to-day activities 3 Present at rest Self-Reported Health To evaluate the person's perception of their health. The person's perception of their overall health status. Ask the person, "In general, how would you rate your health?" Do not code based on your own judgment or opinion about the person's health and do not record ratings given by family, friends, or other informants. This item should be treated strictly as a self-report measure. Ifthe person is unable to respond (due to cognitive impairment, for example) or refuses to respond, do not dwell on the item and do not presume responses for the person; instead, use code "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''. Record the person's response according ... to one of the following categories. 0 Excellent 1 Good 2 Fair 3 Poor Examples of How to Code Dyspnea and Self-Reported Health When asked, "lngeneral, how would you rate your health'" Mr. R said that he was ingood health, other than having to recover from knee surgery. He reported, "I don't anticipate any difficulties with thal because I'm generally quilehealth)е:е He was Umi asked ifhe had experienced any shortness of breath in the last 24 hours. Mr. R said that he had noticed some breathing difficulty yesterday and this morning when he was walking, but it seems better now. Code: C3 (Dyspnea) = "2" = "Fair" Mr. R reported shortness of breath when walking in Lhe last 24 hours. Code: C4 (Self-reported heaJth) = "1" = "Good" Mr. R rated hishea!lh as "good:' Mrs. D is 74 years old. She states that she has arthritis and coronary artery disease. She Lives independenUy in her own home. When asked, '111 general, how would you rate your health?" she stated, "My health is poor. I have pain every day because of the arthritis, and I can't do a lol of things because ofmy heartproblems. Every day l become short of breath with the least bitof exercise, and r have to resta lotduring the day'.' Code: C3 (D)'spnea) = "2" = "fair" Mrs. D reported shortness of breath while doing everyday activities. Code: C4 (Self-reported health) = "3"= "Poor" Mrs. D reported that her health was poor. cs. Self-Reported Mood7 Intent To record the person's self-reported mood over the last 3 days. A 3-day look-back period is used to provide a more stable estimate of distressed mood than would be possible with a 24еshour loo!k-back. Definition These items involve a verbal report ofthe person's subjective evaluation of four dimensions of mood state (anhedonia, anxiety, dysphoria, anger) over the last 3 days. Ask: "In the last 3 days, how often have you felt .. :' C5a. Little interest or pleasure in thingsyou normally enjoy? C5b. Anxious, restless, or uneasy? C5c. Sad, depressed, or hopeless? C5d. Angrywith yourself? C5e. Angrywith others? Process Ask the person the previous questions directly. Only the person's responses should be used to rate each item. Ifthe person is unable (due to cognitive impairс ment, for example) or refuses to respond, do not dwell on these items and do nsotе impute responses to the person. Instead, use code "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond''. Coding Code each item using the person's response as to whether they experienced the feelings referenced in the item at any time over the last 3 days, regardless of what the person believes to be the underlying cause of these feelings. Persons unable or unwilling to respond should be scored as "8" for "Person could not (would not) respond. Use the following codes: 0 Notin last 3 days 1 Not in last 3 days, but often feels that way-Use this code only if the person indicates the feeling is frequently pressent and active, but was not experienced in the last 3 days. 2 In 1-2 oflast 3 days 3 Daily in last 3 days 8 Person could not (would not) respond Examples of How to Code Self-Reported Mood The assessor met with Mr. A and his daughter in the hospital where Mr. A was admitted followinga fracturedhumerus.sMr. A has a diag1losisofAlzheimer's disease and is severely cognitively impaired. The assessor was unable to communicate with Mr. A because ofhis cognitive impairment so the clinical evaluation was done with his daugе hter. Code: For all self-reported mood items in C5a-C5e = "8" = "Person could not (would not) respond" The assessor was unable to ask Mr. A thequestion regarding mood. When asked by theassessor ifhe has felt sad,depressed, or hopeless inthe last 3 days, Mr. N stated that he did feel depressed about his failinghealth and increasing dependence for assistance fromhis family. He continued by saying, "I've been sad and depressed every day for weeks, and my daughter suggestedthat l see a physician soon:' Code: C5a = "3" = "Daily in last 3 days" Mr. N did express feelings ofdepression daily over the last 3 days. Ms. Z was tearful and crying during her interview when beingassessed in hospital How.ever, when asked how often she felt sad, hopeless, or depressed in the last 3 days, she responded "No, not at aU:' Code: CSa = "O" = "Notin last3 days" Do not make any inferences about Ms. Z's mood state.Record only what she reported she was feeling. C6. Instability of Conditions Intent Definitions Process Coding C7. Intent Process Coding To document the presence of any condition or disease (chronic or acute) that affects the person's medical stabielity. C6a. Conditions/diseases make cognitive, ADL, mood, or behaviour patterns unstable (fluctuating, precarious, or deteriorating)e-Denotes the chang.ing and variable nature of the person's condition. For example, the person may have a condition such as ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, or mul.tiple sclerosis that causes pain or impairs mobility or sensation, resulting in increased dependence on others and depression. C6b. Experiencing an acute episode or a flare-up of a recurrent or chronic problem-The pers.on is symptomatic for an acute health condietion (such as new myocardial infarction, adverse drug reaction, or influenza) or recur.rent acute condition (such as aspiration pneumonia or urinary tract infec.tion). Also included are persons who are experiencing an exacerbation or a flare-up of a chronic condition (for example, new-onset shortness of breath in someone with a history of asthma, or increased pedal edema in a person with congestive heart faielure). This type of acute episode usually ies of sudden onset, has a time-limited course, and requires evaluation by a physician. Ask the person or check with other available resources about the presence of any conditions that may be having an impact on the person's overall well-being and health stability. Code for each item. 0 No 1 Yes Home Care or Community Support Services May Be Required for This Person To document the assessor's decision about the need for services when the criteria for continuing with the assessment (as identified above) have not been met. For this item, the assessor uses clienical judgment to determine whether the assessment process should continue beyond Section C. The assessor should review all of the information that they already obtained about the person during the completion of Sections A, B, and C in order to make a clinical judgment about the need to continue with further assessment. In some cases, the referral details (B2a, B2b, and B2c) or the screening items ( Cl-C6) may not provide the assessor with enough information to make a determination for appropriate ser.vices, or there may be some other information given that was not captured in Sec.tions A, B, or C; thus, the assessor would want to continue the interRAI CA. This item allows the assessor to make such a determination. Code to indicate that home care or community support services are, or might be, required. 0 No -No indication that the person requires further evaluation (for example, it was determiened that they were not eligible for services or the person refused service). If home care or community support services are not indicated, the bal.ance of the assessment would not be completed and the assessor signs and dates completion of the interRAI CA in Item EB. 1 Yes -For any reason, the assessor determines that it would be helpful to pro.ceed with the interRAI CA and complete Sections D and E. On Completion of Cl-C78 If any of the preliminary screening items meet the criteria described below, com.plete Sections D and E. If none of the items is coded as indicated, proceed to Item EB. Cl = 1 or 2 C5 (a-e) = 3 C2 (a-e) = 1 or 2 C6a= 1 C3 = 2or 3 C7 = 1 C4= 3 or 8 . interRAIк Contact Assessment (CA) Form 2 ti) interRAr. Standard Version AScreening Level Assessmentfor Intake to Home andCommunityCare Making decisions regardingtasks ofdailylife-e.g., when toget up orhave meals, which clothes to wear oractivitiesto do 0 Independent-Decisions consistent.reasonable. and safe 1 Some butnotsevere impairment 2 Severely impaired-Neveror rarelymakes decesionsie2. ACTIVffiES OF DAILY LIVING (AOL} SELF-PERFORMANCE Most dependent episode overlast 24hours. IfAOL did not occur in last24 hours, code the mostrecent occurrence. O Independent or set-up help only 1 Supervision or some physical assistanceby olhers 2 Total dependence-Fullperformance byothers durng entireiperiod a. Bathing-How takes a lullеbodybath/ shower. Inc. Iudes howeachlpartof body is bathed: arms. upper and ower legs, chest. abdomen.leperenea! area-EXClUDE WASHING OFBACKAND HAeR, AS WELLASiITRANSFER IN/OUTOFBATHORSHOWER b. Bathtransfer-Howperson transfersin/outofbathorshower c. Personal hygiene-How manages personal hygiene. inceudinglcombing hair. brushing teeth. shaveng, appIiyng makeup. washeng andilieidryingface and hands-EXClUDE BATHSAND SHOWERS d. Dressing lowerbody-Howdressesand undresses (street cIothes.lunderwear)from thewaist down, inceuding prostlleses. orthotIcs. belts,lipants. skirts,' shoes. fasteners.etc.iee. Locomotion-Howmoves between locatonson same ftoor{waIikngielieor wheeling). Ifinwheelchair. self-sufficencyonce in chair.ieDYSPNEA (Shortness ofBreath) O Absa11Ceofsymptom C6a=1 . 6. B 1. . .. . o Not in last3 days 1 Not in last3 days.but often feees that wayle2 In 1-2of ast3daysle3 Daily in last 3 days8 Person coudnot{wouldnot}respondleAsk: "In the last3 days, how often have you feh . ..е a. Little interest or pleasure in things you normally enjoy? b. Anxious, restless, oruneasy? c. Sad,depressed,orhopeless? d. Angrywilh yourself? e. Angrywilh others? INSTABILITYOF CONDITIONS O No 1 Yes a. Conditions/diseasesmakecognitive,AOL mood, orbehaviour . patterns unstable(fluctuating, precarious, or deteriorating} b. Experiencingan acute episode or a flare-up ofa recurrentor . chronic problem HOMECAREOR COMMUNITY SUPPORT SERVICES MAY BE . REQUIRED FORTHIS PERSON 0 No 1 Yes Note: HANYof Ct =1 or2 C2{a-e)=1 or2 C3= 2or3 C4= 3or8 C1i{H1);;J 1 Absentatrest,but presentwhenperformed moderateactivities C7:12 Absentatrest.but presentwhenperformed normal dayеtoеday completeSectionsD andE;activiitesiieotherwise, go to Item ES.3 Present atrest 4. SELF-REPORTED HEALTII . Ask: "In general, how wouldyou rate yourhealth?" o Excellent 3 Poor 1 Good 8 Personcould not (would not) respond2 Fair SECTION D. Clinical Evaluation 1. CHANGE IN DECISIONMAKING AS COMPARED TO 90 DAYS AGO 0 b. Ordinaryhousewortt-Howperforms ordinary workaround the 0 (ORSINCE LASTASSESSMENT IF LESSTHAN 90 DAYS AGO) 1 house (e.g.,doing dishes. dusteng, making bed. tidying up, laundry)0 Improved c. Manage medications-Howiemedications are managed (e.g.. 01 No change rememberngtotakemedIcations.opening bottes. takeng correct drugieiieli2 Declined dosages. givinginjectons. applyeng oentments)ieiie8 Uncertan d. Stairs-How manages full flightof stars (e.g., 12-14 stairs)iie-e. Shopping-How performs in-store shoppingforfood and2. ABILITYTO UNDERSTANDOTHERS (Comprehension) 0 E3 Understanding verbal information content (however able; with household items (e.g.,selectiing iitems. paying money)-EXCLUDE TRANSPORTATION ORUSE OF GROCERYDELIVERYSERVICEShearingdevice normally used) f. Transportation-Howtraves bypaedtransportaton (e.g., navegatng0 Understands-Clearcomprehenson leieieieie0iebus system, payngtaxi fare) ordrving self (includinggettng out ofiiei1 Usually understands-Misses some part/intentofmessage house. into and out ofvehicles)BUT comprehendsmostconversatonie4. CHANGEIN AOL STATUS AS COMPARED TO 90 DAYS AGO (OR2 Often understands-M sses some part/intentof messageBUT wth repetiitonor expei anaton can often comprehend SINCELAST ASSESSMENT IF LESS THAN 90DAYS AGO) 0 ieiieleieO Improvedconversation 1 Nochange3 Sometimes understands-Responds adequateytosimple,le2 DeclineddrectcommunicatIon onyieiile8 Uncertain4 Rarely orneverunderstands 5. DISEASE DIAGNOSES3. INSTRUMENTALACTIVITIES OFDAILYLIVING {)ADU CAPACITY Record diseases or diagnoses thathave a majoreffecton the care[COUNTRY SPECIAC-CANADAJ requiredCode forCAPACITYbased on presumed abilityto carry out activity asindependently as possible. This willrequire speculation by the O Not present assessor. 1 Prmarydagnoss/diagnoses for current referraiiiel2 Deagnosispresent.receiivngactve treatment0 Independentorset-uphelp only ieiii3 Deagnosispresent.monitoredbut noactvetreatmentt Supervision orsome physical assistance by olhers iie:....... -.-.-.Hс. еееееееееееееее8 .......r ire.....,.,.n.-_.eFermaeby--,.n.,__ uene......__,__ea. :.-:!-..:seee ee.-,:nc.,е-:--....n.,,,n-.,:n.r C:., ing,.__ ._.,.e.nrnr n.rn.re.. "ll"..-... ,.n!re.:,'"..,,,'ее:.e...n .,,,:n,.n.re.."l.l".-... ,. 