Introduction: The interRAI CAPs interRAI Assessment Instruments The interRAI Clinical Assessment Protocols (CAPs) are designed to work with a variety of interRAI's community and long-term care assessment instruments. The released CAPs in this instructional manual support the following instruments: . Nursing Home MDS (NH), Version 2.0 (MDS 2.0) . RAI-Home Care (HC), Version 2.0 (HC 2.0) . interRAI Long-Term Care Facilities (LTCF) . interRAI Home Care (HC) . interRAI Community Health Assessment (CHA) . interRAI Assisted Living (AL) In designing these instruments, interRAI strived to create user friendly, reliable, person-centered assessment systems that inform and guide comprehensive care and service planning in each of these settings and programs. The CAPs focus on a person's function and quality of life, assessing the person's needs, strengths, and preferences. They facilitate referrals when appropriate, and when used on multiple occasions, they provide the basis for an outcome-based assessment of the person's е response to care or services. interRAI CAPs Overview interRAI's assessment instruments enable care providers to address key factors in the person's life, including aspects of function, health, social support, service use, and quality of life. Subsets of these items have been selected to identify persons who may benefit from care and support in each of the many problem areas referenced by the CAPs, with subsets of items forming CAP triggers. The CAP trigger items are thus referenced in the description of each CAP, and the Appendices reference how to secure the computer code used to formulate these CAP triggers. As this manual addresses triggering for multiple instruments, an individual item referenced by a trigger may not appear in every instrument. The goals of care vary from one CAP to the next, but include the possibility of resolving the problem, reducing the risk of decline, or increasing the potential for improvement. These subsets of items, known as "CAP triggers;' link the informa.tion gathered in the assessment to the basic problem referenced by the CAP. Com.pared to earlier versions of the CAP triggers, this triggering approach now seeks to identify two types of persons. First are those who have a higher than expected like.lihood of declining -a very typical scenario, for example, for long-stay residents. Second are persons who have an increased likelihood of improving, including those declining due to a recent acute problem (for example, delirium, psychosis, falls, pneumonia} and whose symptoms will be alleviated when the problem is addressed. Using this approach, it was possible to cut the proportion of CAPs triggered for follow-up in all settings. For example, of the eighteen problem areas represented by the earlier MDS 2.0 versions of these CAPs, the trigger rate has dropped by one-half. Finally, interRAI is updating the approach to care instructions provided in each of these problem areas, focusing where possible on clinical issues and strat.egies that have been empirically demonstrated to lead to positive outcomes. We see this as a continuing effort to refine the guidelines as the quality of the data and knowledge -ours and others -improves. interRAI intends to continue to review these CAPs -both the text and the triggering logic -to update them to improve practice patterns. е For those triggered, each CAP contains care guidelines to help to think through the relevant underlying issues and move toward a plan of care. Clinical Assessment Protocols (CAPs) guide the plan of care to resolve problems, reduce the risk of decline, or increase the potential for improvement. interRAI's CAPs cover problems in four broad areas: . Functional performance . Cognition and mental health . Social life . Clinical issues Persons typically trigger on multiple CAPs, with the overall triggering rate deter.mined by the vulnerability of the person and the setting in which he or she is seen.* . Persons in North American nursing homes average 4 triggered CAPs (of 22 CAPs assessed). . Persons screened for admission to North American nursing homes average 7 triggered CAPs (of 25 CAPs assessed using the interRAI Home Care form}. . Persons in home care programs that serve as an alternative to nursing home placement average 6.5 triggered CAPs ( of the 25 assessed). . Persons in a typical home care program in Canada, Europe, or Hong Kong average 5.5 triggered CAPs (of the 25 assessed}. . Even some independent older adults trigger on these CAPs, but the average is only about 2 CAPs per person, with over 75% of these persons having a problem on the Prevention CAP, and 15 to 20% having problems with social relationships, pain, falls, and mood. The goal of the health care professional is to use the information provided in the CAP Guidelines to arrive at a plan of care, and where possible and required, provide the service or make an appropriate referral. At the same time, health care professionals may find themselves working within a context where reimbursement systems or eligibility requirements limit the care options. Thus, they may not be able to offer services to fully address the person's needs in all triggered problem areas at that point in time. Nevertheless, a comprehensive assessment that includes the strengths, preferences, and needs of the person can be useful to develop priori.ties, schedule services, make appropriate referrals, and assess program outcomes. The development of a care plan should be a collaborative effort between the health care team, the person, and his or her informal supporters. Whenever possible and appropriate, the preferences and priorities of the person should be the start.this manual the results of interRAI's analyses of data holdings from North America, Europe, and еToroughout the Pacific Rim will be reported in relation to specific CAPs. The reported percentages arise from research undertaken specifically in support of the CAP redevelopment effort. A series of peer-reviewed publications that provide more detailed technical descriptions of this work is in preparation. X Introduction ing point for developing a care plan that builds on his or her strengths in order to address specific needs. CAPs by setting: The following chart indicates where interRAI's CAPs are applied. CAP FUNCTIONAL PERFORMANCE Physical Activities Promotion instrumental Activities of Daily Living Activities of Daily Living Home Environment Optimization Institutional Risk Physical Restraints COGNITION/ MENTAL HEALTH Cognitive Loss Delirium Communication Mood Behavior Abusive Relationship SOCIAL LIFE Activities Informal Support Social Relationship CLINICAL ISSUESC Falls Pain Pressure Uker Cardiorespiratory Conditions Undernutrition Dehydration Feeding Tube Prevention Appropriate Medications Tobacco and Alcohol Use Urinary Incontinence Bowel Conditions е interRAI LTCF, not MDS 2.0. b interRAI HC, not interRAI AL. Home Care/ Assisted Living X X X X X X X X X X X Xb X X X X X Xd Xb Xb X X X X X Community Health Assessment [note: all HC CAPS when functional supplement used] X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Nursing Home / Long.Term Care Facility X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X xе X xr X X c The Cardiorespiratory and Appropriate Medications CAPs cannot be calculated for the abbreviated quarterly nursing home assessments. d interRAI HC, not HC 2.0. е Suite, not MDS 2.0. r Suite, not MDS 2.0. Introduction xi .r.еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее Functional Performance CAPs 1. Physical Activities Promotion CAP 2. Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP 3. Activities of Daily Living CAP 4. Home Environment Optimization CAP 5. Institutional Risk CAP 6. Physical Restraints CAP Part I Functional Performance CAPs 1 ссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс---------------------------------------сссссссссссс---------------------------------,.. Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP Problem The Physical Activities Promotion CAP identifies persons who engage in low levels of physical activity -that is, they engage in less than 2 hours of physical activity over a 3-day period (performing instrumental tasks around the home, walking, or carrying out a planned exercise program). At this level of engagement, most persons areat an elevated risk of having anumber of health complications and physical decline. The benefits of a more intensive schedule of physical activity include enhanced cardiovascular endurance, better mood, a lower risk of falling, a slowing of func.tional decline, and better control of weight. Persons who engage in higher levels of regular physical activity, such as walking, have been shown to have better balance, more mobility, and greater strength in their legs. Frail persons residing in long-term care facilities may benefit as well from tar.geted exercise programs, with a resultant slowing in loss of abilities in everyday activities of daily life (for example, dressing and walking).Cognitively impaired per.sons may also benefit from increased physical activity and, as is true for everyone, they are more likely to participate in activities that they did before or that they currently enjoy. For example, persons who played golf may enjoy putting practice. Studies have shown benefits of walking programs in long-term care facilities, eve.ning walking for wanderers, and multisensory exercise programs. Achieving a consistent pattern of at least 1 hour of physical activity a day can be a challenge. Thus, for persons triggered by this CAP, one needs to follow a gradual four-step program: (1) educate the person about the benefits of higher levels of physical activity; (2) identify why the person has not been more active; (3) sched.ule a step-by-step program of physical activity acceptable to the person; and (4) encourage the person to gradually adopt and then continue with the physical activ.ity program over an extended period of time. Effective physical activity counseling programs assist the person in developing a concrete plan consistent with his or her goals, while providing acceptable strategies to overcome barriers. These barriers might include a lack of interest, the objection Overall Goals of Care е Increase hours ofexercise and physical activity. е Prevent loss of independent function inIADLs, ADLs, and mobility. е Develop concrete goals and strategies to address potential barriers. е Amongthespecific strategies to beconsidered, include the following: involvement in house.work and shopping, mobility indoors and outdoors, increasing lhe distance walked (or wheeled), and increasing the speed of walking. е For lower functioning persons, engage the family, staff, or caregivers in counseling activities and strategizing to overcome barriers. Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP 3 .r.ееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее-. of loved ones, an absence of time to engage in the activities, poor weather, fluctu.ating health status, unexpected health events that involve periods of bed rest or inactivity, or limitations due to a stroke or cognitive impairment that restricts either understanding or the ability to consistently follow through on the agreed plan. But C regardless of the barriers, the goeal of this CAP is to work with the person to find a suitable physical activity strategy that fits into his or her lifestyle. Physical Activities Promotion CAP Trigger The goeal of this CAP is to increase physical activity levels of functionally capable sedentary adults. In order to be successful and appropriate, a plan to overcome medical barriers and conditions should be designed in collaboration with the per.son's pheician.ys TRIGGERED TO FACILITATE IMPROVEMENT This subgroup is defined by two factors: . First, the person is engaged in less than 2 hours of physical activity over the last 3 days. . Second, the person has one or more of the feollowing positive assets: Moves in the residence without help or cueing Goes up and down stairs without help Believes he or she could be more independent Caregiver believes the person could be more independent The person has good prospects of recovery from current diseases or conditions Given these functional reserves, persons in this subgroup are the most likely to be able to achieve increased hours of physiceal activity. Yet, only a small fraction of this population has been shown to improve (about 11%) over the following 90-day period, and the principeal feocus of care is to increase the liekelihood of this happen.ing. Note that this group includes about 30% of persons receiving home care, 25% of persons in long-term care facilities, and 15% of older adults living independently in the community. NOT TRIGGERED All other persons. Physical Activities Promotion CAP Guidelines Personal choice. To promote change in physiceal activity levels, it is essential to involve the person in choosing the goals and strategies to achieve the objectives. The aim of the professional working with the person is to . Increase awareness of the health benefits of exercise. . Help the person contemplate a future lifeestyle in which exercise is a part of his or her weekly routine. . Engage the person in a discussion of the types of exercise (such as activities around the house, walking, or dancing) that they had enjoyed previously or others they would lieke to try at this time. 4 Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP . Discuss any barriers that might prevent the person from increasing his or her exercise levels or maintaining these levels. A low-key approach is most likely to be effective in increasing the person's (or family's) receptiveness and readi.ness to change. Options for persons with high (good) functioning (both physical and cogni.tive). To determine the person's level of interest in exercise and pheical activity, ys consider the following: . Discuss the person's preferences for exercise such as dancing, walking as a part of daily life or as a planned activity (alone, with others, when doing cer.tain activities, over afixed course), bicycling, and exercise classes. Persons who previously enjoyed exercise are more likely to return to exercise. . Discuss options to suit the person's interests and level of functioning. . Identify the person's level of readiness for change. !I е е . The proposed activity should be realistic and accessible. Selection of activities that are meaningful for the person are more likely to be followed. A nonmotivated person may begin with small steps, for example, walking more frequently. A sedentary person may benefit from a discussion of changes in his or her daily routines that promote lower levels of physical activity. A person with little or no interest in exercise may be willing to discuss other goals and how exercise might assist in helping meet them. For the motivated person, discuss how appropriate physical activities can become a part of the daily routine in addition to individually tailored train.ing programs in the home or community. . Some persons will need practical information on how to accomplish the goals given their current health status. . When there is agreement on exercise goals, engage the person in a discussion of potential barriers that could interfere. For each barrier consider solutions. . Provide as much information as possible about suitable and available pro.grams. е е е For any age, exercise must be undertaken sensibly to avoid injury and com.plications. Therefore, it is necessary to consult and work collaboratively with the person's primary care physician and ensure that proper screening is performed before an exercise program begins. е Persons who are willing and able to attend community-based programs may be referred to them. In some areas, programs are targeted to persons with specific chronic con.ditions, and some may offer special accommodations. Family members or volunteers may be able to assist in outdoor activities if the person is not confident about walking outdoors. Persons who do not wish to join exercise classes or group activities may use available home exercise videos. Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP s . Develop a schedule of pheical activity including ys Aerobic activities, such as moderately intense walks for at least 30 minutes, е . . е е4 to 5 days a week. Progressively more intense muscle strengthening exercises on at least 2 nonconsecutive days each week. Examples include progressive weight training and weight bearing calisthenics. Flexibility training activities in conjunction with the muscle strengthening exercise routine. Balance exercises several times a week. Options for persons with IADL or AOL problems. If the person has triggered on either the IADL or ADL CAP, give precedence to those guidelines. Otherwise, consider the following: . If the decline is recent, refer the person for individualized interventions with a rehabilitation professional. . If pain is a problem, see Pain CAP. . If balance is a problem, see Falls CAP. . If sufficient food intake is a problem, see Undernutrition CAP. . Refer to self-management programs those persons who have chronic condi.tions that may fluctuate in intensity or predispose them to flare-ups or acute events. The more confidence the person has in managing his or her health condition, the greater the potential for adherence to an exercise program. . It is important to recognize that modest increases in activity levels may have beneficial effects. Training programs that are too strenuous are unlikely to be followed and may pose immediate risks to the health of the person. -Provide feedback and rewards if possible. . Develop a written set of goals and time lines so that the person, family, and formal staff can chart progress and recognize when key milestones have been reached. . Be prepared to give feedback to the person and family in multiple outcome areas including balance, absence of falls, mobility, endurance, pain, mood, and specific goal attainment. Additional Resources Heyn P. 2003. The effect of a multisensory exercise program on engagement, behavior, and selected physiological indexes in persons with dementia. Ameri.can Journal of Alzheimere's Disease and Other Dementias (18,4): 247-51. Holmberg SK. 1997. A walking program for wanderers: Volunteer training and development of an evening walker's group. Geriatric Nursing (18,4): 160-65. MacRae PG, Asplund LA, Schnelle JF, Ouslander JG, Abrahamse A, Morris C. 1996. A walking program for nursing home residents: Effects on walk endur.ance, physical activity, mobility, and quality ofelife.eJAGS (44,2): 175-80. Martin JL, Marler MR, Harker JO, Josephson KR, Alessi CA. 2007. A multi.component nonpharmacological intervention improves activity rhythms among nursing home residents with disrupted sleep/wake patterns. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 62: 67-72. 6 Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP Miriam Hospital PhysicalActivity Research Center:www.lifespan.org/ behavmed/researchphysical.htm NelsonME, Rejeski WJ, BlairSN, Dubcan PW, et al. 2007. Physical activity and public health in older adults. Recommendations from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Circulation: 116. Universityof RhodeIsland CancerPrevention Research Center:www.uri.edu/research/ cprc/transtheoretical.htm Section 1 Physical Activities Promotion CAP 7 .r.еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP Problem This CAP identifies persons who have the capacity and interest to carry out instru.mental activities of daily living (IADLs) more independently. The targeted IADLs include preparing meals, doing ordinary housework (washing dishes, making beds, dusting, tidying up, and so on), shopping, and using public transportation or driv.ing oneself. A loss of full self-sufficiency in IADLs is often the first expression of a later, more widespread general decline in functioning. An estimated 17 to 30% of older adults living in the community have IADL problems, with these numbers rising to about 50% of persons living in elderly housing, and over 95% of persons receiving home care. Of persons. who are independent in almost all AD Ls but who require assistance in the early-loss ADL of bathing, almost all (about 98%) will also have an IADL problem. For persons with both interest and capacity to carry out IADLs more indepen.dently, there is high potential for useful interventions. Overall Goals of Care е Preserve current lADL self-sufficiency levels for as long as possible and improve performance if functioning is below capacity. е Monitor for recent acute events, chronic conditions, or symptoms (such as pain) that influ.ence functional status. е Review and monitor medications. е .Evaluate effect of motivation and mood on functional status. е Counsel persons on importance of physical activity and exercise, and provide self-manage.ment education. е Depending on level of function, refer persons who are performing below capacity, and cspe.ciaJly those who have recently worsened (for example, in the past 3 months), to community programs, exercise counseling, or specialized physical therapy (P"f) or occupational therapy (OT) services. е Discuss preferences for alternate living arrangements for those who have no interest in con.tinuing or assuming responsibility for lADLs Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP 9 .r.еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее IADL CAP Trigger This CAP applies to persons living in home care, assisted living, and independent community housing. Its goal is to identify a subset of persons who are capable of and interested in improving their ability to perform these activities. Four key obser.vations are used to identify persons who will trigger this CAP. First, there must be a belief that the person could improve (including those who have recently declined in functioning). This belief can also be considered a proxy for motivation. Second, the person must have at least some moderate dependency in performing IADLs. Third, the person must not be fully dependent in more basic functioning, as represented by Activities of Daily Living (AD Ls) such as dressing. Finally, the person must have at least some cognitive capabilities. TRIGGERED WITH POTENTIAL TO IMPROVE This group includes persons who display all four of the foellowing key characteristics: . Couled improve -Presence of one or more of the following foeur items: е Ill е . IADL difficulety (capacity) -A total of 3 or higher (or 7 or higher on inter.RAI's new suite) on the scale produced by summing the codes for the feollow.ing difficulty/capacity items: meal preparation, ordineary housework, shopping, and treansportation. . ADL peerformance -A score of 0, 1, 2, or 3 on the ADL Hierarchy Scale, representing levels from "independent" to "receiving extensive assisteance with early-loss ADLs:' . Cognitive peforrmance -A score of 0, 1, or 2 on the Cognitive Performance Scale (levels from "independent" to "meild impairment"). This triggered group includes 20% of persons receiving home care and 2% of older еadults living independently in the community. Over a 90-day period, 15% of this group in a home care program will become more independent in IADL perfor.mance. The goal is to increase this percentage. NOT TRIGGERED This group includes all other persons. This accounts for about 80% of persons receiv.ing home care and 98% of older adults living independently in the community. For those in tehis group with IADL deficits, an appropriate response would be limited to providing services that complement the care provided by feamily and friends. IADL CAP Guidelines The following guidelines apply to those persons who trigger the IADL CAP, because they should have the capacity for increased independence in IADeLs. Approach to improve IADL perfoermance: . Speak with the person and feamily to identify recent changes. Newly occur.Person believes she or he could be more independent, Assessor believes person could be more independent, Person judged to have good prospects of recovering from current disease [Note: Not an item in interRAI's integrated suite but in version 2.0], and ADL status has become worse. of chronicring medical issues, pharmacological changes, or recurrence problems can result in functioneal decline. Note whether IADL performance -1 0 Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP is now worse than before the precipitating event. If so, improvement can be expected following resolution of the acute problem, while further decline can be expected if the evolving problem is not addressed. . Implement monitoring. Monitor for an acute health problem or the flare-up ofa recurrent or chronic problem. Pay particular attention to recent falls, pain, mood, infections, delirium, medications, undernutrition, and vision problems. . Falls -A history of falls usually triggers a program to address issues of bal.ance, postural dizziness, muscle strength, reduced stamina, overly cautious movements, and loss of range of motion (for example, bending, reaching). Thus, if the Falls CAP is triggered, look for the possibility of benefits as the person improves in these areas. [See Falls CAP.] . Pain-One-third to one-half of older adults living independently in the com.munity will experience pain, and the resultant course of care begun when the Pain CAP is triggered will often lead to a decrease of pain levels. Thus, if the Pain CAP is triggered, look for improvement in IADLs as pain is managed. [See Pain CAP.] . Mood -Depression can affect IADL performance because of both with.drawal from activities and the fatigue often associated with this condition. [See Mood CAP.] However, also recognize that the reverse can happen: Decreased IADL capability can result in increased mood problems or decreased feelings of well-being. Thus, improvements in IADLs may have a positive effect on mood state. . Infection or other acute eventscan affect IADL performance due to second.ary effects of inactivity and fatigue. . Delirium can affect IADL performance because of an inability to accomplish usual daily tasks. [See Delirium CAP.] . Medications -Drugs such as anxiolytics, antipsychotics, antidepressants, and hypnotics may induce side effects that result in IADL decline. Consider other drugs that can produce dizziness, hypotension, syncope, balance prob.lems, gait disturbance, and falls. Medication noncompliance or discontinued medication may also contribute to IADL decline. Review the results of the Medications CAP to determine whether medications are contributing to the IADL problem. . Monitor nutrition status if there has been recent weight loss or a low Body Mass Index. [See Undernutrition CAP.] . Vision problems and deteriorating vision can have profound effects on IADL tasks. Rehabilitation strategies and technical aids are available to improve per.formance in IADLs despite vision loss. Identify strengths. Persons with good cognition and especially strong motivation will be most able to develop and maintain a program to address IADL loss. Those persons with sufficient financial resources will have greater options to purchase PT and OT services, join an exercise program, or purchase an assistive device. The availability of supportive family or friends will also help the person through encour.agement, co-participation, and assistance. Address functional problems. About one-half of the observed improvements in IADLs will occur as persons experience improvements in more basic ADL function, е cognition, and communication. [See ADL CAP, Cognition Loss CAP, and Com.munication CAP.] The CAPs in these three areas provide useful information for improving the person's performance. The key from an IADL perspective is to make Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP 11 1-.-m-.-m-.-m-.--m-.-m-.-m-.-m-.-m-.-m...--ессссссссссссссее..-.-.rеессссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс a conscious link between improvements in these three areas and potentieal improve.ments in IADLs. For example, as you note an improvement in ADLs, ask whether this opens opportunities for the person to become more self-sufficient in IADL activities. In fact, assume the answer is "eyes:' Give the person the opportunity to become more involved in the basic IADLs, for example, helping to assemble the ingredients to cook a meal, meixing the ingredients, or setting the table. Often, the ADL plan of care will be the primary strategy for introducing a pro.gram that will lead to IADL improvements. If the underlying limitation lies in physical perfeormance, review the ADL and Fealls CAPs for suggestions to improve balance, strength, and endurance. Depending on the person's level of functioneing,exercise programs may be done alone at home, in community centers, or in clubs; alternately, addressing these problems may require a formal specialized program by a physical therapist. . Assessthe peerson's detailed peerformance and opportunitiesfoerincreased . Seek opportunitiesfoer increased self-performance of IADLs. Informal caregivers often assume responsibility for IADL activities which, if given suf.ficient time, the person could either perform or at least assist in performing. It is important that persons be allowed to function within their capacity, and even to expand on their capacity as they display an ability to carry out IADL tasks. Build on a person's setrengths. е involvement in IADL. If a person has difficulty with an IADL, break it down into a series of subtasks. For example, meal preparation can be broken down into retrieving food from storage, preparing each item, combining them as needed, cooking them, and serving the meal. Involvement may be encouraged at different steps until the person becomes more confident in performance. Difficulties should be examined to determine whether the underlying prob.lems reflect strength, balance, coordination, or cognitive or organizational problems. From this analysis, seek to identify the specefic action or piart of an IADL activity feor which an assistive device or environmental modification is needed, where skills retreaining may be helpful [see ADL CAP], or where the person could be involved if given the opportunity. An occupational therapist may be helpful in both analyzing and making appropriate recommendations. .Assess the person's knowledge and skills. Sometimes, an IADL problem is associated witeh a lack of skills or knowledge about performance of tasks pre.viously perfeormed by others, such as a spouse. This is relevant to widowed or divorced men when required to do housekeepeing, cooking, and shopping .tasks they may have seldom or never before perfeormed. The seame may be true for older women with yard work or managing money (paying bills, balancing a checkbook). In these circumstances, the assessment should feocus on both the person's willingness and ability to learn new skills to achieve greater IADL independence. Assume the ability is there and schedule practice sessions. For example, take the person on a supermarket outing or sit with the person as he or she writes and posts checks. . It ies also important to iemprove knowledge and skills in self-management of chronic conditions. These are particularly important for conditions that е may have flare-ups or reoccur. Check for loceal availabeility of self-management programs. . Motivation. Motivation is a key strength. Persons who are motivated and believe that they have the potential to improve are more likely to demon.strate improvement in performance. Persons with better cognitive function may also be easier to engage in activity programs. Not all persons are moti.vated to maintain their past level of involvement in IADLs. They may have extended themselves in the past to perform these activities and now, tired, they are seeking help with them. It is important to assess IADL status even Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP 1 2 for persons known to be receiving help. It is not uncommon for persons to report the need for more help than they are receiving. Some will need training or services, while others may need only counseling and reassurance. Familyor friends may assist with IADLs or provide companionship and assurances. However, it is important to avoid premature substitution, that is, the taking over of IADL tasks in which the person was involved previously. "Doing for the person" is often a poor approach to care. Family education on the benefits of active participation is important. Cognitive training programs. Formal programs that assist with reasoning, deci.sion making, memory, and visual processing have demonstrated effectiveness in reducing functional decline in IADL performance. [See Cognitive Loss CAP.] Prefeerence alternatives. If a person is no longer interested in assuming respon.sibility for IADLs or has never been interested, explore alternatives. This situation may arise following the death of a spouse who previously did all the cooking, clean.ing, or yard work. . Begin counseling on the importance of physical activity and exercise, particu.larly if the person is no longer performing IADLS or has had a decline in activ.ity. [See Physical Activities Promotion CAP.] . Explore alternate resources for either informal assistance or paid help. . Initiate discussion on moving to alternate locations such as a continuing care retirement community, a seniors' residence, or an assisted living setting that provides services for meal preparation and housework. ,, . If considering a move, suggest questions that should be asked of each poten.tial alternative location. For example, check the type and availability of differ.ent activities and exercise programs such as strengthening equipment, dance classes, aquatics, and walking groups. Ideally, look for the availability of activi.ties that the person has enjoyed in the past, enjoys now, or is interested in trying. . Counsel persons to engage in activities that stimulate cognitive function such as bridge, chess, and puzzles. These skills assist in maintenance of IADLs such as finance and medication management. . Refer persons to self-management programs for their chronic conditions, so that they are better prepared to adjust to fluctuations in status and recover from flare-ups or other acute problems. Additional Resources Elzen H, Slaets JP, Snijders TA, Steverink N. 2007. Evaluation of the chronic disease self-management program (CDSMP) among chronically ill older people in the Netherlands. Soc Sci Meed. 64(9): 1832-41. Epub 2007, March 13. Fujita K, Fujeiwara Y, Chaves PH, Motohashi Y, Shinkai S. 2006. Frequency of going outdoors as a good predictor for incident disability of physical function as well as disability recovery in community-dwelling older adults in rural Japan. J Epeidemeiology 16(6): 261-70. Graff MJL, Vernooij-Dassen MJM, Thijssen M, Decker J, Hoefnagels WHL, Rikkert MGMO. 2006. Community based occupational therapy for patients with dementia and their caregivers: Randomized controlled trial. BMJ 333: 1196. Tinetti ME, Allore H, Araujo KL, Seeman T. 2005. Modifiable impairments predict progressive disability among older persons. Journal of AegingHeealth 17(2): 239-56. Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP 13 Williams CS, Tinetti ME, Kasl SV, Peduzzi PN. 2006. The role of pain in the recovery of instrumental and social functioning after hip fracture.Journal of Aging Health 18(5): 743-62. Willis SL, Tennstedt SL, Marsiske M, Ball K, Elias J, Koepke KM, Morris JN, Rebok GW, Unverzagt FW, Stoddard AM, Wright E. 2006. ACTIVE study group: Long-term effects of cognitive training on everyday functional outcomes in older adults.JAMA 296(23): 2805-14. Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Katherine Berg, PhD, PT Catherine Hawes, PhD Brant E. Fries, PhD 1 4 Section 2 Instrumental Activities of Daily Living CAP .r.еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее 