Introduction to the interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS) Assessment System The interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS) is a standardized screener for documenting information pertaining to the mental health status of persons who have contact with police or other front-line service providers. The interRAI BMHS has been designed to be compatible with other internationally used interRAI instru.ments for emergency psychiatry, in-patient psychiatry, community mental health, long-term care facilities, home care, acute care, and post-acute care. The compat.ibility of elements improves the continuity of care through a seamless health assess.ment system across multiple settings and promotes a person-centred approach to care. The interRAI BMHS is designed to document (1) indicators of disordered thought and (2) indicators of risk of harm to self or others. Supplemental information to the overall screening process should be added as judged necessary. The interRAI BMHS is used to capture and standardize the observations made by front-line ser.vice providers about a person's mental health status. This information can be used to determine the need for comprehensive psychiatric assessment or appropriate referral to community mental health agencies. There are two versions of the interRAI BMHS, one designed for use by police officers (interRAI BMHS-Police) and the other intended for use by other front-line service providers (interRAI BMHS-General). .ompleting the interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMH____S)_______ Key points regarding completion of the inter RA! BMHS follow. . The interRAI BMHS is designed for use by front-line mental health and emergency personnel (for example, police officers, criminal justice personnel, community mental health workers, nurses, social workers, case managers, psychiatrists, psychologists, and family physicians). It consists of items and definitions that should be used as a guide in structuring the assessment. . The assessment process requires direct communication with the person and the primary support person (if available), observation of the person, com.munication with all others who have knowledge of the person's current cir.cumstances, and available records. Where possible, the person is the primary source of information . . The items on the interRAI BMHS flow in a logical sequence and can be com.pleted in the order in which they appear. However, the assessor is not bound by this sequence. Items may be reviewed in any order that works best for the assessment of the person. . The interRAI BMHS can be used as a guide in questioning the person or key family members and informants. When uncertain of the validity of informa.tion from a given source, a more in-depth assessment should be done and professional judgment should be used to determine the information that is most accurate. . It is best to talk in private with each informant, if possible. Basic Principles Underlying the interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS) 1. The goal is to use the information obtained from the interRAI BMHS to support front-line decision making regarding the need for comprehensive psychiatric assessment or referral to a community mental health agency. 2. To do this requires integrating what you see and hear to accurately code each of the interRAI BMHS items. 3. Any acute medical matter should be brought to the attention of the person immediately, and the person should be helped to obtain appropriate medical care. As would be expected in standard practice, instances of risk of harm to self or others warrants special and immediate intervention. 4. In situations where there are conflicting sources of information, use your profes.sional judgment to determine the response that best reflects the person's status. 5. If there is evidence of abuse or neglect, immediate intervention may be war.ranted, in accordance with the laws of your local jurisdiction. For example, police officers might consider laying criminal charges or referral to an appropriate agency or authority; other front-line service providers might consider contacting a police agency or another appropriate agency or authority. How to Use This Manual Although there are two versions of the inter RA! BMHS Assessment Form, one for police officers and the other for other front-line service providers, there is only one manual. Accordingly, there are sections of this manual with information that per.tains to a particular form. The interRAI BMHS form itself contains a "Definitions" section for some of the items as a quick reference guide. The guidelines that follow summarize the recommended approach for becoming familiar with the interRAI BMHS. The initial time invested in this multistep review process will save you time later. Becoming Familiar with the interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS) First, review the interRAI BMHS form itself. . Note how sections are organized and where information is to be recorded. ссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс......-.I--..---.............-ессссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссссс . Examine item definitions and response categories. . Review procedural instructions, time frames, and general coding conven.tions. Next, complete the interRAI BMHS based on a person whom you have previously had contact with and who you had reason to believe had a mental health disorder. . Enter the appropriate codes on the form. . Where your review could benefit from additional information, make note of that fact. Think about where you might obtain additional information. . Write down your questions as you go along. Next, complete an initial review of Part II, "Item-by-Item Guide to the inter RA! Brief Mental Health Screener:' . Read the item-by-item definitions and review the questions that arose as youused the interRA! BMHS to assess a person that you knew had a mental health disorder. . Review the test case you completed. Would you still code it the same? . Do any definitions or instructions differ from what you thought you learned when you reviewed the inter RA! BMHS form? Would you now complete your test case differently? . Do any definitions or instructions differ from terminologyused in your organ.ization? . Make notations next to section(s) of this manual about which you have ques.tions. Be prepared to discuss these issues during any formal education pro.gram you attend. In a second pass through Part II, focus on issues that were difficult or problematic in the first pass. . Make notes on the interRAI BMHS form of issues that warrant attention. . Further familiarize yourself with definitions and procedures that differ from your current practices or that seem to raise questions. The third pass through Part II may occur during the formal inter RA! BMHS edu.cation session at your organization, and it will provide you with another opportun.ity to review the material in this manual. If you have questions, raise them during the education session. Future Use of Information in This Manual . Keep this manual at hand during the screening process. . This manual will serve as a reference as long as you are using the interRAI BMHS form. Use it on an ongoing basis to increase the accuracy of your assessments . Item-by-Item Guid,e to the interRAI Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS) Intent Definition(s) Process Coding To facilitate completion of the interRAI BMHS and to ensure consistent interpreta.tion of items, this part presents the following types of information for many (but not all) items: Reason(s) for including the item (or set of items) in the interRAI BMHS. Explanation of key terms. Sources of information and methods for determining the correct response for an item. The assessment is based on information collected from a variety of credible sources, including one or more of the following: . The person . Clinical records, or the police records database . Family or other available informal support, such as neighbours and friends . Health care and community service providers, such as the person's family physician or nurse practitioner, police officers, community outreach workers . Complainants, witnesses . The organization responsible for the person (if any) The information acquired from these sources must be used in such a way as to comply with privacy and other appropriate legislation within a particular jurisdic.tion (for example, health care consent legislation). If there is a discrepancy between what is reported by the person, what is observed, and what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Any additional information obtained during the assessment can be recorded in "Section г-Notes:' Proper method of recording the response for each item, with explanations of indi.vidual response options. It is also important to note the time frame of each item. NOTE: If the information is unknown or the assessor is unable to elicit a response using all available sources of information, the "No" response option should be used to complete the item. A note can be added to Section E explaining that no informa.tion was available . е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е е ii'i-.с .......................еее .....-,f...-\l--.-.-.-.-.1. еееееееееее е"""'"еееееее...........................li"....T".-E'a'....,,,.--.-ееееееееееееееееее е..Section A Identification Information A1. Name Definition Coding A2. Person's legal name. Use printed letters. Enter in the following order: Ala.  First-Given name  Alb.  Middle initial-Initial or middle name  Ale.  Last-Family name  Ald.  Jr./Sr.-Suffix  If the person has no middle initial, leave Item Alb blank. Likewise, leave Item Ald blank if appropriate. Sex Definition  The biological sex of the person.  Coding  M. Male  F. Female  A3.  Birthdate  Coding A4. Intent Use four digits for the year of birth. For the month and day, enter two digits each, using a leading zero ("O") as a filler if needed. For example, January 2, 1968, should be entered as: 6 8 Year Month Day Postal Code of Usual Living Arrangement [Country Specific] To document the postal code of the residence that would normally be considered the person's permanent residence. This item has the potential to assist in the plan.ning of services at regional and provincial/territorial levels, and track utilization of services at provincial/territorial and regional levels. Definition Postal code of usual living arrangement-The postal code assigned by Canada Process Ask the person or a family member or obtain from available records. Coding Enter the alphanumeric code. If the whole postal code is not available, code the first three digits of the postal code (that is, the forward sortation area). If the first three digits are not available, code one of the following: 1 (for homeless persons) .____I, I.___________.__I .____I.___________.__ (not known; for instance, the person is unable to recall his or her postal code, and there is no other source of information) (not applicable; the person does not reside in Canada) AS. Homeless Intent To identify those persons who lack consistent shelter and who may require follow.up with social services. Definition Homeless (with or without shelter)-A homeless person does not have a fixed residence, that is, a home, apartment, room, or place to stay on a regular basis. The person may live on the streets or outside in wooded or open areas. The person may sleep in cars, abandoned buildings, under bridges, or in a homeless shelter, etc. Persons who are homeless may or may not take advantage of existing homeless shelters. Coding Code for the person's present status in terms of homelessness. 0. No 1. Yes A6. Date and Time Contact Initiated Definition Coding The date and time contact was made with the person. For the month and day, enter two digits each, using a leading zero ("O") as a filler when needed. Use four digits for the year. For time, use the 24-hour time system. For example, March 23, 2015, at 2:30 in the morning should be entered as: O 2 3 OI I I I I Day Time 24-hour time system A7. Occurrence Number (BMHS-POLICE) [Country Specific] Coding Record the occurrence number. A7. Case Record Number (BMHS-GENERAL) [Country Specific] Coding Record the case record number . Section B Indicators of Disordered Thought 81. Mental State Indicators and Behaviours Intent Definitions To record the presence and frequency of mental state indicators and behaviours observed in the last 24 hours or prior irrespective of the assumed cause of the indicator. In some cases, an indicator may not have been observed in the last 24 hours but it continues to be "present" and active in a way that has a meaningful impact on the person's current care needs. When combined with other items in the screener, these indicators can provide information about the severity of the person's condition. Mental state indicators may be expressed verbally through direct statements by the person or through nonverbal indicators or behaviours. Bla. Irritability-Marked increase in being short-tempered or easily upset. Blb. Hallucinations-False sensory perceptions, of any type, with or without insight, without corresponding stimuli. These may occur in one or more of the senses: hearing (auditory hallucinations), seeing (visual hallucinations), feeling (tactile hallucinations), tasting (gustatory hallucinations), and smell.ing (olfactory hallucinations). In other words, information not grounded in fact (for example, the person hears, sees, smells, feels, tastes things that can.not be substantiated by others). Do not include command hallucinations in this item. Blc. Command hallucinations-Hallucinations directing the person to do something or to act in a particular manner (for example, a voice telling the person to hide in a contained space to avoid contact with enemies, a voice telling a person that he must kill his father before his father kills him). NOTE: Command hallucinations are separated from the others because of their severity and the potential lethality if the person acts on them. Bld. Delusions-Fixed, false, unchangeable beliefs of any of the following types: е Delusions of grandeur-A false belief characterized by an exaggerated sense of one's own importance.е Paranoid or persecutory delusions -A false belief of being attacked, harassed, cheated, persecuted, or conspired against. е Somatic delusions -A false belief related to the body, such as believing that one has cancer, despite exhaustive negative testing. In other words, a delusion is an unshakable false belief. For example, the person believes he or she is a famous person or that some other individual or entity is conspiring against or attempting to control the person in some way. NOTE: Exclude beliefs specific to the person's religion or culture. Ble. Hyperarousal-Observations of motor excitation, unusually high activity, ..........................................P,...,...A,.vt..i.v................................................. wеесссссссс ........ Process Blf. Pressured speech or racing thoughts-Rapid speech or rapid transition from topic to topic. Blg. Abnormal thought process-Objective observations that indicate abnor.malities in the manner in which the person is expressing thoughts. Include indicators such as loosening of associations, thought blocking, flight of ideas, tangentiality, circumstantiality, clang association, incoherence, neologism, and punning. е Loose associations-The person jumps from one topic to another with.out an apparent connection between the topics. е Thought blocking-The person suddenly stops in the middle of a sen.tence and is unable to recover what he or she intended to say or to com.plete the thought. е Flight of ideas-The person's thoughts are expressed quickly with fre.quent shifts in topic. е Tangentiality-The person digresses from the subject under discussion and introduces thoughts that seem unrelated, oblique, or irrelevant. е Circumstantiality-The person incorporates an unnecessary, exces.sive amount of details but eventually gets to the point he or she wants to express. е Clang association-The person uses groups of words that are similar in sound, often rhyming, and connections between the meanings of the words are tenuous. е Incoherence-The person's speech is unclear or confused. The com.munication does not make sense to the listener. е Neologism-The person makes up a word, which may be condensed from several words. Neologisms are unintelligible to the listener. е Punning-The person will often play on words, for example, use words that are similar in sound but different in meaning or use words that have two or more meanings. B lh. Socially inappropriate or disruptive behaviour -For example, made dis.ruptive sounds or noises, screamed out, smeared or threw food or feces, hoarded, rummaged through others' belongings. Bli. Verbal abuse-For example, others were threatened, screamed at, cursed at. Blj. Intoxication by drug or alcohol-A condition following alcohol or drug consumption in which the person experiences one or more of the following: slurred speech, lack of coordination, unsteady gait, attention or memory dif.ficulties, impaired judgment, stupor, or coma. Observe for the presence of any of the above indicators. If available, ask other cred.ible sources of information (for example, family members, friends, health care or community service providers) about the presence of the indicators. If there are discrepancies in what is reported by the person, what you observe, and what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Record any details or additional information about the person's mental state indica.tors and behaviour in "Section г-Notes''. For example, if the person is experiencing a visual hallucination, describe what the person is seeing, if obtainable. Assessment of these indicators focuses on the person's actions and thoughts, not the intent behind those actions. Do not attempt to determine the meaning behind a particular thought or behaviour; rather, simply determine and record whether the person exhibits the behaviour . Coding 82. Intent Definitions Process Coding 83. Intent Definition Code for the presence of each indicator over the last 24 hours, regardless of what you believe to be the underlying cause of the indicator. Use the following codes: 0. Not present 1. Present but not exhibited in last 24 hours NOTE: Use this code only if you know the condition is present and active but it was not observed in the last 24 hours. 2. Exhibited in last 24 hours Degree of Insight into Mental Health Problem To determine the person's level of awareness of his or her mental health problems and the contributing factors. Insight in this context is not intended to imply an in.depth understanding of the signs and symptoms that the person is experiencing. Rather, the person is assessed a.s having insight if there is recognition that there is a problem and that he or she is in need of some help. Full insight -The person recognizes that a problem exists and appears to under.stand the problem or that he or she needs treatment. Limited insight-The person acknowledges some but not all aspects of the prob.lem (for example, underlying causes, treatment options, impact on others). None -The person appears to have no awareness of his or her difficulties or mental health problem. Insight can be assessed by asking the person about his or her view of the present situation or what is happening to him or her. Is there recognition that a problem exists? Does the person recognize the causes and the need for help? NOTE: Information obtained through discussions with family members, friends, complainants, witnesses, caregivers, or any credible source of information may be helpful for assessing insight. Code for degree of insight. O.eFull 1. Limited 2. None Cognitive Skills for Daily Decision Making To record the person's actual performance in making everyday decisions about the tasks or activities of daily living. Examples of decision-making tasks: . Choosing appropriate clothing given the weather . Knowing when to eat meals Process Coding . Seeking information appropriately (not repetitively) from others in order to plan the day . Asking for help when necessary . Making prudent decisions concerning how to get to places Interview and observe the person and consult with others (for example, a familymember) where possible and necessary. The inquiry should focus on whether the person is actively making decisions about how to manage tasks of daily living and not whether others believe that the person might be capable of doing so. Remember the intent of this item is to record what the person is doing (actual performance). When someone takes decision-making responsibility away from the person regarding tasks of everyday living, or when the person does not partici.pate in decision making (whatever his or her level of capability may be), the person should be considered as having impaired performance in decision making. This item also requires you to differentiate between (1) the lack of ability to par.ticipate in decision making or the lack of opportunity to make decisions and (2) making decisions that others may not agree with (for example, refusing treatments, refusing to have a shower). The latter would not be considered impairment if the person was actively involved in making the decision. Enter the code that most accurately characterizes the person's cognitive perform.ance in making decisions regarding the tasks of daily living in the past 24 hours. 0. Independent-The person's decisions for organizing daily routine were consist.ent, reasonable, and safe (reflecting lifestyle, culture, values). 1. Modified independence or any impairment-Refers to any of the following situations: е The person organized his or her daily routine and made safe decisions in familiar situations but experienced some decision-making difficulty when faced with new tasks or situations only. е In specific situations, the person's decisions were poor or unsafe, with cues/ supervision necessary at those times. е The person's decisions were consistently poor or unsafe; the person required reminders, cues, or supervision at all times to plan, organize, and conduct daily routines. е The person's decision making was severely impaired; the person never (or rarely) made decisions. е The person is non-responsive . Section C Indicators of Risk of Harm C1. Previous Police Contact in Last 30 Days Intent To determine if the person had previous contact with the police in the last 30 days and if so, whether the contact resulted in a mental health apprehension. Definition Previous police contact-The item asks that you determine if there was previous police contact (regardless of reason) in the last 30 days and if so, whether the con.tact resulted in an involuntary mental health apprehension. This typically involves taking the person to the nearest hospital emergency department for the purpose of psychiatric assessment or treatment. Process Ask the person if he or she has had contact with the police during the last 30 days. If so, ask him or her to describe the outcome of the contact. This information may also be available from other sources (for example, police and case records, family, friend, neighbour, health care and community service providers). If there is a dis.crepancy between what is reported by the person or what is in records or reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Record any additional information in "Section E-Notes''. Coding Enter the most appropriate code. 0. No contact -No previous police contact in the last 30 days for any reason. 1. Any contact, no mental health apprehension -Previous police contact in the last 30 days for any reason, including a mental health concern that was not ser.ious enough to make an apprehension under the Mental Health Act. 2. Any contact, mental health apprehension -Previous contact in the last 30 days for any reason and there was a mental health concern serious enough to warrant apprehension under the Mental Health Act with or without charges pending. C2. Person Has Been Known to Carry or Use Weapon(s) in the Last Year Intent Definition Process To determine whether there is evidence that the person carries or uses any type of weapon. Weapon(s)-Any object used or intended to be used to cause death or injury to another person or to threaten or intimidate another person. Ask the person, family members, or other sources of information (for example, health care and community service providers, witnesses, case records or files) to determine if the person has carried or used weapons in the last year. Check for the I.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.е.'.е.е.е.е 6 ..е.е.,I.е.е..ееее.е.е.е. .'lf---.-.-.--.--."li е . е . се-.rrt,1-.--ll'. . е . е . .. . . . Y . . . Y . ............ Coding (3. Intent Definitions Process Coding authority. If the person demonstrates signs of paranoia, you might ask if he or she has anything with him or her for self-protection. If there are discrepancies in what is reported by the person, what is observed, or what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Record any additional information (for example, type of weapon) in "Sec.tion г-Notes''. Code for evidence that the person has been known to carry or use weapons in the last year. 0. No 1. Yes Violence To identify those who are at risk of becoming violent. These items focus on acts of ill will, active opposition, hostility, or antagonism that may be directed toward others or inanimate objects. Past violence is often the best predictor of future vio.lence. C3a. Violent ideation-The person reports (or someone else has credible infor.mation) that the person has had premeditated thoughts, made statements, fantasized, or planned to take actions of violence toward others. C3b. Intimidation of others or threatened violence -Attempts by the person to force or deter someone by using threatening gestures, a threatening stance with no physical contact, shouting angrily, aggressive or intimidating star.ing, yelling personal insults or curses, using foul language in anger, kicking the wall, throwing furniture, etc. The person may also make explicit threats of violence against others. C3c. Violence to others-Violent acts that result in physical harm to another person. These are characterized by purposeful, malicious, or vicious intent by the perpetrator and can include violence driven by command hallucina.tions. Violent actions can include, but are not limited to, any physical act of harm to another, such as stabbing, choking, or hitting/beating (with or without a weapon). This information can be obtained through the person, family, a therapist, records, arrest records, and other records of judicial proceedings, if available, and past encounters with the person. family members should be interviewed away from the person so that they can speak openly. In situations where there is a discrepancy between what is reported by the person, what you observe, or what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Code for the presence of each indicator over the last 24 hours. 0. Not present 1. Present but not exhibited in last 24 hours NOTE: Use this code only if you know the condition is present and active but it was not observed in the last 24 hours. C4. Indicators of Self-Harm Intent Definitions Process Coding cs. To identify persons who are engaging in or who are at risk of engaging in self.injurious behaviour. C4a. Self-injurious attempt in LAST 7 DAYS-Includes both lethally motiv.ated suicidal behaviour (intentional, self-inflicted attempt to kill oneself} and behaviour that inflicts intentional self-injury without suicidal intent (for example, self-mutilation). Nonintentional, accidental, or unconscious self-destructive behaviours that may lead to injury or premature death (for example, chronic substance abuse, hyperobesity, non-compliance with treat.ments for illness, risk-taking behaviour) are not considered self-injurious behaviours for the purposes of this item. C4b. Considered performing a self-injurious act in LAST 30 DAYS-The per.son has thought about performing an act of self-injury. This includes a com.mand hallucination that is telling the person to harm him-or herself. C4c. Suicide plan -In the last 30 days, the person formulated a scheme to end own life. C4d. Family, caregiver, friend, or other expresses concern that person is at risk for self-injury-The person's behaviour indicates to someone else that he or she is at risk for self-injury, whether or not the person has verbalized thoughts of harming him-or herself. Interview the person and consult with family members, friends, complainants, wit.nesses, care providers, and any other credible sources of information, including past records. In situations where there is a discrepancy between what is reported by the person, what you observe, or what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Family members should be interviewed separately from the person so that they can speak openly. Code for each item, based on identified time frames. 0. No 1. Yes Home Environment-Squalid Condition Intent Definition Process To determine if the home environment is hazardous or uninhabitable. Squalid condition-For example, extremely dirty. There may be dried urine, feces, or dried food on the floor or infestation by insects or vermin (such as mice or rats). For an environment to be coded as "squalid;' the condition must be much more deteriorated than "usual" clutter and household dust and dirt accumulated over a week or so. Ask the person (or family member) permission to walk through the home. Look for evidence of squalid conditions. If the environment cannot be visually inspected, talk to the person ( or a family member if necessary) to obtain information about the living environment. Coding Code for the presence of squalid living conditions. Use code "8"only if a home visit was not possible AND if there is no other individual available to discuss the home environment. For example, the person refuses to discuss his or her home environ.ment and there is no other individual (including family, friends, other formal care workers) available who knows the condition of the person's living environment. 0. No 1. Yes 8. Unknown, home not visited or no information (6. Refused to Take Some or All of Prescribed Medication in Last 3 Days Intent To document any refusal to take prescribed medication, regardless of the reason, during the last 3 days. Definition Prescribed medication-Any medication prescribed by a health care professional licensed to do so, such as a physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or pharmacist. Process This information can be obtained from the person, family, or others who are famil.iar with the person (for example, family physician, care provider, therapist). If there is a discrepancy between what is reported by the person or what is reported by others, use your professional judgment to determine the best response. Record any additional information in "Section E-Notes': Coding Code for refusal to take some or all of prescription medication in the last 3 days. 0. No, or no medications 1. Yes Section D Disposition 01. Intent Definitions Action(s) Taken The intent of this section is to record the action(s) taken by the police officer(s) or front-line service provider(s) as a result of the interaction with the person. (BMHS-POLICE) Dla.  Voluntarily escorted  to hospital-The person voluntarily agreed  to  accompany police to the emergency department of a hospital for the pur.pose of obtaining assessment or treatment.  Dlb.  Transferred to EMS/mobile crisis team-The responsibility for the per. son is transferred to emergency medical service (EMS) or a mobile mental  health crisis team.  Dlc.  Caseworker/probation notified-Contact  was made with the person's  existing community caseworker or probation officer and information regarding this contact with the person was shared, especially in cases where the person is considered vulnerable and a possible danger to him-or herself or others.  Dld.  Referred to community mental health agency-A referral was initiated  for follow-up with a community mental health agency.  Dle.  Apprehended under existing order-Examples of existing orders would  include those issued by a physician or by a justice of the peace, or an order issued when the person has contravened the conditions of a community  treatment order.  NOTE: Different jurisdictions may have other legislation; therefore, the def.inition of "apprehended under existing order" may be country-or region.specific.  Dlf.  Involuntarily apprehended-There are reasonable grounds to believe the  person has a mental health disorder and under the authority of the Mental  Health Act he or she is involuntarily apprehended and transported to the nearest hospital emergency department for the purpose of obtaining psychi. atric assessment or treatment.  NOTE: Different jurisdictions may have other legislation; therefore, the def. inition of "involuntarily apprehended" may be country-or region-specific. Dlg. Charges pending-The police officer intends on laying charges for an offence(s). Definitions (BMHS-GENERAL) Dla. Voluntarily escorted to hospital-The person agreed to accompany a front-line service provider to the emergency department of a local hospital ееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееее.r.t..\FPA..A...WPi..,Pif.i...-e--.t.,tKiW.Ptеееееееееееееееееееееееw..ееееееее_....... Coding D2. Dlb. Transferred to EMS/mobile crisis team-The responsibility for the per.son is transferred to emergency medical service (EMS) or a mobile mental health crisis team. Dlc. Caseworker notifiedс-Contact was made with the person's existing com.munity caseworker and information regarding this contact with the person was shared, especially in cases where the person is considered vulnerable and a possible danger to him-or herself or others. Dld. Referred to community mental health agency-A referral was initiated for follow-up with a community mental health agency. D le. Police notified-In some circumstances, particularly if the person is a dan.ger to him-or herself or others, police were notified for assistance. Dlf. Support person notified-A family member or a close social contact, as identified by the person, was contacted. Identify action(s) that were taken as a result of the contact. NOTE: Multiple actions might be taken. For example, the person could have been involuntarily apprehended and taken to hospital and also have charges pending, or the person was escorted to hospital and family were notified. 0. No-The action was not taken. 1. Yes-The action was taken. Hospital Information (if applicable) (BMHS-POLICE only) Intent Process Definitions Coding To record the name of the hospital the person was taken to, verify that a copy of the BMHS-Police form was received by a member of the hospital staff, and document admission to hospital. This item is completed only if the person was taken to hospital. Otherwise, leave blank. D2a. Hospital Name -Print name of hospital. D2b. interRAI BMHS received by-A hospital staff member is asked to sign or stamp the form once he or she receives a copy of the inter RAI BMHS Assess.ment Form. D2c. Admitted to hospital-Information regarding admission can be obtained from emergency department staff. Use the following to complete Item D2c. 0. No-The person was not admitted for further assessment or treatment. 1. Yes-The person was admitted for further assessment or treatment. 8. Unknown-Information about admission to hospital was not available . Section E Notes Intent The "Notes" section is to be used to expand on observations made during the screening process or to add pertinent information not otherwise documented. Where applicable, it is also used to note if additional police officers or other formal care agencies were involved in the contact. Process Note any pertinent observations in the space provided. For example, if the person is hearing voices, make a note that he or she is hearing voices and include the con.tent (for example, what the voices are saying), if known. If the person is a danger to him-or herself, note the details about plans the person may have to harm him-or herself. This section should also be used to note the type of weapons found, if any; the nature of previous police contacts; the substance(s) the person has been using (for example, alcohol, marijuana, cocaine); and the name of any prescribed medica.tion the person is taking, if known. Also include detailed information regarding the home environment, if available . ................................................................................................................................. Section F Assessment Information F1 . Signature of Person Coordinating/Completing the Assessment Intent To document identifying information of the police officer or front-line service pro.vider who completed the interRAI BMHS Assessment Form. Definitions Fla. Print Name -The police officer or front-line service provider prints his or her name to indicate that he or she was responsible for completing the interRAI BMHS Assessment Form. Flb. Signature-Signature of police officer or front-line service provider com.pleting the form. Flc. Badge Number or Agency-For police officers completing the BMHS Police form, enter the badge number. For service providers completing the BMHS General form, record the name of the agency or program. Fld. Police service/ detachment/ division -For police officers completing the BMHS Police form, enter the name of the police service/ detachment/ division. F2 . Date and Time Intent To document the date and time the police officer or front-line service provider signed the assessment form as being complete. Coding For the month and day, enter two digits each, using a leading zero ("O") as a filler when needed. Use four digits for the year. For time, use the 24-hour time system. For example, March 23, 2015, at 9:30 in the evening should be coded as: 1 5 Year Month Day Treme 24-hour time system ееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееwееееееееее_....... Section G Time Arrived and Left Hospital (if applicable) and End Call Time (interRAI BMHS-POLICE Only) 61. Date and Time Officer Arrived in the Hospital Emergency Department (if applicable) Intent Definitions Coding 62. NOTE: If the person was not taken to an emergency department, leave this item blank. To determine the length of time the police oflicer(s} spent in the emergency depart.ment if this was the action taken by the officer(s}. If the officer(s} did not take the person to the hospital, leave Items Gleand G2 blank and complete Item G3. Date-The day the police officer(s} arrived in the emergency department with the person. Tune -The time the police officer(s) arrived in the emergency department with the person. Enter the date and time of arrival in the emergency department. If the month or day contains only a single digit, fill the first box with "O". For time, use the 24-hour time system. Example: The police officer arrived in the emergency department with the person at 1 o'clock in the morning on January 20, 2015. 1 5 O 1I I I Year Month Time 24-hour time system Date and Time Officer Left the Hospital Emergency Department (if applicable) Definitions NOTE: If the person was not taken to an emergency department, leave this item blank. Date -The day the police officer was advised that police services were no longer required in the emergency department. Tnne -The time the police officer was advised that police services were no longer required in the emergency department. ееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееwееееееееее_....... Coding Enter the date and time the police officer left the ED. If the month or day contains only a single digit, fill the first box with "O". For time, use the 24-hour time system. Example: The police officer was no longer required in the ED as of January 20, 2015, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. 1 5 1 4 O OI I I I I Year Month Day Tun e 24-hour time system 63. End Call Time Intent Definitions Process Coding NOTE: This item is to be completed for all contacts regardless of whether the per.son was taken to hospital. To document the time the call ended so it will be possible to calculate the total amount of time devoted to the call with information from Item A6 (Date and Time Contact Initiated) and Item G3 (End Call Time). Date -The day the police officer ended the call. Time -The time the police officer ended the call. Record the time the officer cleared the call. This would be after completing all required documentation and paperwork. NOTE: If multiple officers were involved in the call, record the number of addi.tional officers in "Section г-Notes': Enter the date and time the call ended. If the month or day contains only a single digit, fill the first box with "O". For time, use the 24-hour time system. Example: The police officer completed the call on January 20, 2015, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. 1 5 Year Month Day Tun e 24-hour time system (BMHS) int.rRAIк Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS} GJ interRAIк 1Police Assessment Form [CODEFORLAST24HOURSUNLESSOTHERWISESPECIFIED] SECTION A. Identification Information 1. NAME 5. HOMELESS . 0 No 1 Yes 6. DATEANDTIMECONTACTINITIATED M Male F Female a. (First) b. (Middle initial) c. (Last) 2. SEX . Year Month Day b. Ttme 3. BIRTHDATE ..rn-rn-.. Year Month Day 4. POSTAL coDE oF usuAL LIVING ARRANGEMENT .,........,...1 1[EXAMPLE-CANADA] SECTION B. Indicators of Disordered Thought 1. MENTALSTATE INDICATORS AND BEHAVIOURS 0 Notpresent 1 Presentbut notexhibited in last24 hours 2 Exhibited in ast 24 hoursl a. Irritability b. Hallucinations c. Commandhallucinations d. Delusions e. Hyperarousal f. Pressuredspeechorracingthoughts g. Abnormalthoughtprocess h. Sociallyinappropriateordisruptivebehaviour i. Verbalabuse j. Intoxicationbydrugoralcohol SECTION C. Indicators of Risk of Harm 1. PREVIOUSPOLICECONTACTINLAST30DAYS O Nocontact 1 Anycontact, no mental heaIth apprehension 2 Anycontact, mental health apprehension 2. PERSON HAS BEEN KNOWNTOCARRYORUSEWEAPON(S) INTHELASTYEAR 0 No 1 Yes .rn . . DIII (24-hr time system) 7. OCCURRENCENUMBER[EXAMPLE-CANADA] IILJl l[J IIIII 2. DEGREEOFINSIGHTINTOMENTALHEALTHPROBLEM . 0 Full 1 Limited 2 None 3. COGNITIVESKIUSFORDAILYDECISIONMAKING . Makingdecisionsregarding tasksofdailylife-e.g.,whentoget uporhavemeals,whichclothestowearoractivitiestodo 0 Independent-Decisionsconsistent, reasonable, and safe 1 Modified independence or any impairment 4. INDICATORSOFSELF-HARM 0 No 1 Yes a. Self-injuriousattemptinLAST7DAYS b. Consideredperformingasett-injurious actinLAST30DAYS c. Suicideplan-InLAST 30 DAYS, formulateda scheme to end д own l fei d. Family,caregiver,friend,or other expressesconcernthat . VIOLENCE Codeformostrecentinstance O Notpresent 1 Present but notexhibited in last 24 hours 2 Exhibited in last 24 hours a. Violentideation b. Intimidationofothersorthreatenedviolence c. Violencetoothers personisatriskforself-injury 5. HOMEENVIRONMENT-SQUALIDCONDITION-e.g.,extremely . dirty, infestation by rats or bugs 0 No 1 Yes 8 Unknown, home not visited or no informaton 6. REFUSEDTOTAKESOME ORAllOFPRESCRIBEDMEDICATIONд i . IN LAST3DAYS 0 No, or no medications 1 Yes SECTION D. Disposition 1. ACTION(S)TAKEN 2. HOSPITALINFORMATION(ifapplicable) Recordaction(s)takenasapplicable _a. Hospital Name_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _0 No 1 Yes Print a. Voluntarilyescortedtohospital b. interRAI BMHSreceivedby _b. TransferredtoEMS/mobilecrisisteam Pr nti _I..............-..J',i'1i'WV'V'IIY..l-1Jеif'lr1..ir.r.r11,.'ir,е------mmmm........,___,_......_ ____mmmmmm______mmmmmm_____ m "' (BMHS) interRAIк Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS} 6j) interRAI2. . Police Assessment Form SECTION E. Notes Provide other relevant information regarding the contact SECTION F. Assessment Information 1. SIGNATURE OF PERSONCOORDINATING/COMPLETING 2. DATE AND TIME THE ASSESSMENT a. Date .I.!.0.12.,I-CD-CD Year _a. PrintName___ __ _ ____________ (prnt on above line) b. Time I I I I isb. Signature _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ (24-hr time system) _ (sign on above line) c. BadgeNumber_ _ d. PoliceService/ Detachment/ Division_ __ _ ___ SECTION G. Time Arrived and Left Hospital (if applicable) and End Call Time 1. DATE AND TIME OFFICER ARRIVED INHOSPITAL EMERGENCY 3. ENDCALL TIME DEPARTMENT (if applicable) Complete for all contacts a. Date (I[[]..-.0-[TI a. Date [TI]I I 1-rn-rnYear Month Day Year Month Day Month Day b. Time I I I ll] (24-hr tme system) is2. DATE AND TIME OFFICER LEFT THE HOSPITAL EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT (if applicable) a. Date [Il]J..-0.-rn Year Month Day b. Time [TT]. (24-hr time system) DEFINITIONS B1a. Irritability-Markedincrease in being short-tempered or easily upset. B1 b. Hallucinations-Falsesensory perceptions, of any type, with or without insight, without corresponding stimuli (e.g .. auditory, visual, tactile, olfactory, gustatory hallucinatsons). In other words, sensory informaton not grounded in iifact (e.g., the person hears, sees, smells, feels, tastes things that cannot be substantated by others). Exclude command hallucinations. iB1c. Commandhallucinations-Hallucinations directng the person to do isomething or to act in a partcular manner (e.g., to harm self or others). iB1d. Delusions-Fxedfalse beliefs (e.g., grandiose, paranosd, somatic). In other i iwords, an unshakable false belief, most common being that the person believes he or she is a famous person or that some other person or entity is conspiring ,ееееееееееееееееa...sl.2.e.ll).P-l!-'!9.t. io..oJ .i..o..e.i. 2'f!e.w,n..clu.. .e!i.f. .ecific b. Time I I I I (2 4-hr time system) B1 h. Sociallyinappropriateor disruptivebehaviour-e.g.,made disruptive sounds or noises, screamed out, smeared or threw food or feces, hoarded, rummaged through other's belongings. B1 i. Verbal abuse-e.g.,others were threatened, screamed at, cursed at. B1 j. Intoxication-Acondition following alcohol or drug consumpton in which ithe person experiences one or more of the following: slurred speech, ack of lcoordinaton, unsteady gait, attenton or memory difficulties, impaired judgment, iisstupor, or coma. C3a. Violent ideation-e.g.,reports of premedstated thoughts, statements, plans ito commit violence. C3b. Intimidation of othersor threatened violence-e.g.,threatening gestures гaJ .o.la.t.s.h2uJi.!j, a.n.!'Yi lh.o.t"!n.!u..s.r,!lJ_;.iгil.е.е.е.е.е.еее (BMHS) interRAIк Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS} GJ interRAIк General Assessment Form 1 [CODE FOR LAST 24 HOURS UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED] SECTION A. Identification Information 1. NAME 5. HOMELESS . 0 No 1 Yes 6. DATE AND TIME CONTACT INITIATED Year Month Day M Male F Female a. (First) b. (Middle initial) c. (Last) 2. SEX . 3. BIRTHDATE ..rn-rn-.. Year Month Day 4. POSTAL coDE oF usuAL LIVING ARRANGEMENT .,........,... .rn1 1[EXAMPLE-CANADA] SECTION B. Indicators of Disordered Thought 1. MENTAL STATE INDICATORS AND BEHAVIOURS 0 Not present 1 Present but not exhibited in last 24 hours 2 Exhibited in last 24 hours a. Irritability b. Hallucinations c. Command hallucinations d. Delusions e. Hyperarousal f. Pressured speech or racing thoughts g. Abnonnal thoughtprocess h. Sociallyinappropriate or disruptive behaviour i. Verbal abuse j. Intoxication by drug or alcohol SECTION C. Indicators of Risk of Harm 1. PREVIOUS POLICE CONTACT IN LAST 30 DAYS . O No contact 1 Any contact, no mental health apprehension 2 Any contact, mental health apprehension 2. PERSON HAS BEEN KNOWN TO CARRY OR USE WEAPON(S) . IN THE LAST YEAR 0 No 1 Yes 3. VIOLENCE Code for most recent instance 0 Not present 1 Present but not exhibited in last 24 hours 2 Exhibted in last 24 hours i a. Violent ideation b. Intimidation of others or threatened violence c. Violenceto others д SECTION D. Disposition 1. ACTION(S) TAKEN Recordaction(s) taken as applicable O No 1 Yes a. Voluntarily escorted to hospital b. TransferredtoEMS/ mobile crisis team c. Caseworker notified b. Ttme DI I I (24-hr time system) 7. CASE RECORD NUMBER [EXAMPLE-CANADA] IILJl l[J IIIII 2. DEGREE OF INSIGHT INTO MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEM . 0 Full 1 Limited 2 None 3. COGNITIVE SKILLS FOR DAILY DECISION MAKING . Making decisions regarding tasks of daily life-e.g., when to get up or have meals, which clothes to wearor activities to do 0 Independent-Decisions consistent. reasonable, and safe 1 Modified independence or any impairment 4. INDICATORS OF SELF-HARM 0 No 1 Yes a. Self-injurious attempt in LAST 7 DAYS b. Considered perfonning a self-injurious act in LAST 30 DAYS c. Suicide plan-In LAST 30 DAYS, formulated a scheme to end д own life d. Family, caregiver, friend, or other expresses concern that . person is at risk for self-injury 5. HOME ENVIRONMENT-SQUALID CONDITION-e.g.,extremely . dirty, infestat on by rats or bugs i O No 1 Yes 8 Unknown, home not visited or no informaton 6. REAJSED TO TAKE SOME OR All OF PRESCRIBED MEDICATION i . IN LAST 3 DAYS 0 No, or no medications 1 Yes (BMHS) interRAIк Brief Mental Health Screener (BMHS} 6j) interRAI "' 2. . General Assessment Form SECTION E. Notes Provide other relevant information regarding the contact SECTION F. Assessment Information 1. SIGNATURE OF PERSON COORDINATING/ COMPLETING THE ASSESSMENT a.Print Name ____________________ (prnt on above line) i b.Signature ___________________ _ (sign on above line) c. Agency_____________________ DEFINITIONS B1a. Irritability-Marked increase in being short-tempered or easiy upset. l B1b. Hallucinations-False sensory perceptions, of any type, with or without insight, without corresponding stimuli (e.g., auditory, vsual, tactle, olfactory, ii gustatory hallucinatons). In other words, sensory information not grounded in i fact (e.g., the person hears, sees, smells, feels, tastes things that cannot be substantated by others). Exclude command hallucinations. i B1c. Command hallucinations-Hallucinations directng the person to do i something or to act in a partcular manner (e.g., to harm self or others). i B1d. Delusions-Fixedfalse beliefs (e.g., grandiose, paranoid, somatic). In other words, an unshakable false belief, most common being that the person believes he or she is a famous person or that some other person or entity is conspiring againstor attemptng to control him or her in some way. Exclude belefs specific iito person's culture or religion. B1e. Hyperarousal-Motor excitation, unusually high activity, increased reactivity. B1f. Pressured speech or racing thoughts-Rap dspeech, rapid transition from itopic to topic. B1g. Abnormal thought process-e.g., loosening of associatons. blocking. i flight of ideas, tangentality,circumstantiality, clang association, incoherence. i neologism, punning . 2. DATE AND TIME a. Date !.z.I.o1..-[IJ-[IJ1Year Month Day b. Time I I I (2 4-hr time system) B1 h. Socially inappropriate or disruptive behaviour-e.g., made disruptvei sounds or noises, screamed out, smeared or threw food or feces. hoarded, rummaged through other's belongings. B1 i. Verbal abuse-e.g., others were threatened, screamed at. cursed at. B1 j. Intoxication-A condition following alcohol or drug consumption in which the person experiences one or more of the following: slurred speech, lack of coordinaton, unsteady gait, attention or memory difficulties, impaired judgment, i stupor, or coma. C3a. Violent ideation-e.g., reports of premeditated thoughts, statements, plans to commit violence. C3b. Intimidation of others or threatened violence-e.g., threatening gestures or stance with no physical contact. shoutng angrily, throwing furniture, explicit i threats of violence. C3c. Violence to others-Acts wth purposeful, malicious, or vicious intent, i resultng in physcal harm to another (e.g., stabbing, choking, or beating). ii 