Section 3 Activities of Daily Living CAP Problem The Activities of Daily Living CAP addresses the person's self-sufficiency in per.forming basic tasks of daily living, including dressing, personal hygiene, walking, transferring, toileting, changing position in bed, and eating. A decline in a person's ADL self-sufficiency can lead to a wide variety of compli.cations. These complications can include an increase in incontinence, poor com.munication, cognitive loss, social isolation, depression, falls, and pressure ulcers. For those living in the community, a decline in ADL self-sufficiency is a major pre.cipitator of the person being transferred to a more supervised setting (for example, moving in with others or being transferred to an assisted living or long-term care setting) and can lead to increased use of formal support services. Many conditions can affect a person's ADL independence. Among the more important include a decline in cognitive performance, the onset or flare-up of a recurrent chronic disease (for example, depression), the emergence of an acute dis.ease (for example, stroke) or health problem (for example, hip fracture), and the inappropriate use of medications. While new conditions of this type (and especially advancing dementia) can lead to chronic loss of independence in ADLs, following a plan that encourages ADL self-performance often can slow or even reverse functional decline. Overall Goals of Care е Preserve current AOL self-sufficiency levels for as long as possible. е Monilor a !isl of specific, polenlially troubling acule problems or condilions lhal can be im.proved. е Reverse functional loss resulting from a recent acute event or a condition that can be im.proved. е Prevent further functional loss associated with new acule events or a flare-ltp of chronic con.ditions thal can be improved. е Improve performance iJ functioning below capacity. е Target specific AOL task(s), based on identified inconsistencies between capacity and self.performance, and carry out interventions to improve individualized AD Ls. е Consider referral for physiotherapy (PT) or occupational therapy (01) services for persons whose ADL function is worse now than 3 months ago or who are performing below capacil y. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Activities of Daily Living CAP Trigger The goal of this CAP is to improve performance or prevent avoidable functional decline in persons who already have someADL deficits. TheCAP applies to persons living in independent community housing, persons receiving services from home care programs, persons in assisted living housing, and persons residing in nursing homes (long-stay care residents). The following rules specify the two types of per.sons triggered for specialized follow-up. A key difference between the two triggered groups is whether the person has a fluctuating functional status or condition at the initial assessment, often indicative of a person who has had a recent acute event. TRIGGERED TO FACILITATE IMPROVEMENT Included in this group are persons who have all the following characteristics: . Receive at least some help in AD Ls (but arenot totally dependent in all AD Ls). . Have at least some minimal cognitive assets (as indicated by having a Cogni.tivePerformance Scale [CPS] score ofrless than 6). . Are not at imminent risk of dying. . And, have two or moreof thefollowing indicators that suggest the person has experienced a recent acute event or has a fluctuating functional status: Experiencing an acute episode or a flare-up of a chronic condition Delirium Changing cognitive status (either improving or worsening) Pneumonia Fall Hip fracture Receiving physical therapy Recent hospitalization Fluctuating ADLs (either improving or deteriorating) Fluctuating care need!s (with servicesupports either increasing or decreasing) This group includes about 20% of persons in long-term care facilities, 20% of per.sons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 33% of the persons trig.gered into this group will improve over a 90-day period; the rate of improvement in home care is about 21 %. At the same time, however, this group is in a precari.ous position. In long-term care facilities, about 33% will decline over the ensuing90-day period, while in home care the 90-day decline rate is about 20%. Principal Approach to Care Manage the new onset acute problem and work to return the person to his or her pre-acute functional level. Second, watch to ensure the person does not enter a cycle of spiraling ADL decline. About 70% of persons experiencing these types of acute health problems will have either recently declined in ADLs or are at elevated risk of decline over the following 90-day period. For a person who experienced a decline in AD Ls at the time of the acute health event, addressing the acute health problem is a key step to the person's return to his or her pre-event functional status. As the acute problem is relieved, work to make sure the functional loss is reversed to the maximum extent possible. Also recognize that not all acute-related ADL decline is avoidable. Even with excellent ADL self-maintenance programs, up to 20% of persons with recent onset acute health events will experience a decline inADL. However, in all cases, reversal of the acute health event and recovery of ADL status is a reasonable goal of care. TRIGGERED TO PREVENT DECLINE NOT TRIGGERED Included in this group are persons who have all the following characteristics: . Receive at least some help inADLs (but arenot totally dependent in all ADLs). . Have at least some minimal level of cognitive assets (as indicated by having a Cognitive Performance Scale score ofrless than 6). . Are not at imminent risk of dying. . And, have none or only one of the indicators listed under "Triggered to facili.tate improvement:' This suggests the person has experienced no more than one recent acute event and does not manifest a fluctuating functional status. This group includes about 60% of persons in long-term care facilities, 15% of per.sons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility setting, about 33% of the persons trig.gered into this group will improve over a 90-day period, while 32% will decline. The rate of improvement in home care is about 12%, while the decline rate is about 20%. Principal Approach to Care The following two-step strategy is recommended: . Institute a plan of care to help the person preserve current ADL self.sufficiency levels. . Watch for the onset of acute health problems or new medications that could drive ADL decline (for example, delirium, change in cognition, pneumonia, new hospitalization) and treat or respond in the earliest phase. The onset of such acute problems will be the principal force that drives functional decline in the months ahead. Included in this group is anyone for whom neither functional recovery nor main.tenance to prevent functional decline is the overall goal of care. This group is made up of three distinct subgroups of persons: . The first comprises those persons who independently perform even such early-loss ADLs as dressing and personal hygiene (includes most of the per.sons receiving home care or living independently in the community who are not triggered). . The second comprises those who have no residual functional or cognitive assets (CPS score of 6). . The third comprises those persons who are at imminent risk of dying. The two latter subgroups make up most of those in long-term care facilities who are not triggered on this CAP. This group includes about 20% of persons in long-term care facilities, 65% of per.sons receiving home care, andl 99% of older adults living independently in the com.munity. In a long-term care facility setting, about 25% of the persons triggered into this group will decline over a 90-day period, while 12% will improve. The equivalent rate of improvement in home care is about 14%, while the decline rate is about 14%. . Appropriate ADL monitoring and maintenance care are warranted for those persons with ADL deficits for whom functional recovery or maintenance may not be possible. Activities of Daily Living CAP Guidelines Most service programs successfully reach out to some of the persons identified by the ADL CAP triggers, but miss others and provide care to those who would not benefit. Through this ADL review, a greater number of appropriate persons for ADL improvement or maintenance care will be reached and needless functional decline avoided. This approach targets those persons who will benefit most from intensive assessment, monitoring, and intervention. The care can be reasonably performed in any program setting. Care plans and ongoing monitoring will provide extensive interventions to some and less to others. Approach to improve ADL performance: . Speak with the person, family, and caregivers to identify new acute episodes. Newly occurring medical, pharmacologic, orthopedic, or vision problems can result in precipitous rates of functional decline. When such conditions occur, note whether ADL functional decline follows. If so, improvement can be expected following the resolution of the acute problem; if ADL issues are not addressed, further decline can be expected. Thus, a referral to a physician is recommended, with information provided on noted clinical changes and consequent functional decline. . Implement a monitoring program to Inform family and caregivers of the need to watch for the onset of major acute problems that could lead to functional decline (for example, delirium, pneumonia, falls, and hip fractures). When observed, refer the person to a physician. Inform family and caregivers of the need to detect evolving chronic condi.tions that could lead to functional decline, and especially those that are remediable, such as cataracts or osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. Monitor for inappropriate use of medications leading to functional decline (a newly administered medication, but also a discontinued drug). Check for ADL decline or a drop in activity levels following a recent return from the hospital. . If symptoms of delirium are present, deliver care in line with the Delirium CAP guidelines. As a part of this effort, review medications to identify drugs that may contribute to delirium and interfere with functioning. . If dizziness, falls, or recent hip fracture are present, see Falls CAP. . If the person recently declined or is performing below capacity, refer to or consult with PT or OT, if possible. Persons in this category who receive PT and OT have almost double the rate of improvement over a 90-day period as compared to similar persons who do not receive such care. . Physicians and other members of the interdisciplinary team need to assess and treat the underlying medical problems. . If indicators of inadequate nutritional status are present, implement nutri.tional intervention. [See Undernutrition CAP.] . If indicators of inadequate pain management are present, review management strategies. [See Pain CAP.] Review the two inter RA!assessment items on the staff's and the person's views of whether further improvements in function are possible. Improvements in performance are more likely and less ADL decline is expected if the person and the staff believe improvement is possible. These items should help guide your view of how to plan and carry out care and services for the person. Address chronic cognitive loss. Cognitive loss affects a person's potential for ADL improvement and makes it more difficult to lessen functional decline. The cogni.tive performance items from the interRAI assessment are useful in assessing a per.son's functional capacity and potential for ADL improvement. Specifically, several of the items in the Cognitive Performance Scale ( CPS) can help guide your thinking even when the CPS itself is not calculated. These items include short term memory, decision making, and ability to be understood. [Note: See scoring of key interRAI scales for specific guidance on the CPS. The CPS score should be available in your software system.] . Persons with the greatest deficit in cognition (those with a CPS score of 6) are not triggered on this CAP, as their lack of mental capabilities provide only minimal capacity to improve. . All other persons are triggered, as ADL performance can often be improved or at least preserved in persons with a CPS score of less than 6. . Those with no impairment or even persons with moderately impaired cogni.tion (CPS scores of 0, 1, and 2) have the best capacity to improve in ADL. . Persons with moderately to severely impaired cognition (CPS scores of 3, 4, and 5) need a highly strnctured ADL plan of care. Select targeted ADLs for care interventions to prevent further decline and increase independence by comparing self-performance vs. capacity. ADL loss follows a regular, hierarchical pattern. Typically, persons first need help with the so-called "early-loss" ADLs (bathing, dressing, and personal hygiene), followed by the need for help with "middle-loss" ADLs (walking, transfer, toileting), and finally help with "late-loss" AD Ls (eating and bed mobility). . To help preserve -or even improve -ADL self-performance, the person, family, and caregivers can target a specific ADL area for review and potential improvement. For example: For those who are fully independent in walking, focus on an "early-loss" ADL (usually dressing). Focus on "walking" for someone who still has some ability to walk, but is not totally independent. For those who are dependent in walking, focus the care plan on a "late-loss" ADL (usually eating). For example, if the person can still ingest solid foods, provide opportunity and encouragement to self feed. If triggered on the Undernutrition CAP, follow those instructions for such a person. . Having selected the ADL area around which a program to increase indepen.dence will be based, there are many ways to develop a suitable approach to facilitate improvement. At the more formal end of the spectrum of possible approaches, referrals to therapists or an in-house exercise program may be choices often consid.ered. Also consider building a situation-based ADL maintenance and reha.bilitation program, focusing on the targeted ADL area. Such an approach is described in the following section. . At the less formal end of the spectrum of possible approaches, the person and a key family member can be educated on how to facilitate this type of program. Begin by explaining that increased independence is possible. Set.ting an appropriate expectation is key to change. Then suggest that the person follow a personal version of the formal program described below. The critical elements are as follows: pick an ADL subtask on which to seek greater inde.pendence, provide an opportunity for the person to do the subtask, keep track of success and failure, and build upon instances of success. Example approach to situation-basedADL maintenance and rehabilitation: . Provide verbal instructions or cueing for each step of a targeted program addressing a specific ADL function. . Give the person the opportunity to start the activity step, helping as needed. . Use gestures or verbal cues to which the person responds. . When a person needs help with a selected task, break the task into segments and set goals for improvement within both tasks and segments. . Have all care professionals and family members use the same approach every time the ADL activity is performed. . Continue to use this consistent approach for at least 1 month. . Document progress in how the person engages in the selected ADL task and each task segment. Note changes in how the person begins the task, if cueing or assistance is needed to start, and if he or she can manage to complete the task once started. It may also be useful in measuring progress to document the time required to complete each task or subtask. . Share improvements with caregivers, the person, and family. Sometimes small improvements may not be noticeable to everyone. When well documented, they can be encouraging to everyone involved. Consequence of functional loss of ADL. Functional loss can also lead to the onset of new problems, including, for example, incontinence, social isolation, depression, falls, accidents, and pressure ulcers. Look for the new onset of such conditions and, as ADLs improve, look for corresponding improvements in these areas. Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Katherine Berg, PhD, PT Jean-Claude Henrard, MD Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD Dinnus Frijters, PhD Section 4 Home Environment Optimization CAP Problem The Home Environment Optimization CAP focuses on the home environment, looking at features generally classified as environmental hazards. These include such items as general disrepair, poor lighting, unsafe flooring and rugs, inadequate heating or cooling, faulty appliances, and a general state of squalor. The focus of this review is broad and addresses concerns with life safety, falls, health status, and basic quality of life. Resolving these problems is often a challenge. The person living on a modest income may have made decisions that contributed to the situation (for example, paying for food rather than heat). Such a person may have little personal physical or financial reserves to address these problems. Available public support programs or services may have limited funds to correct environmental deficits, or their pro.gram entitlement guidelines may restrict who can be helped and how funds can be expended. Finally, alternative !housing may be in limited supply, with a long waiting list and restricted eligibility, while family may be unable to provide an alternative setting for the person. At a minimum, this environmental assessment identifies hazards that can be corrected relatively easily. For a more successful implementation of a residential improvement program, the person and his or her key informal caregiver should be included in the decision-making process. For some, acceptance of recommended changes is a process that occurs over time. It is important for the assessor to under.stand the person's resistance to change, including feelings of potential loss, shame, or inadequacy, as well as denial of the problem. Overall Goal of Care е Improve the safety of the environment in whiclh the person lives. Home Environment Optimization CAP Trigger TRIGGERED This CAP triggers for frail adlults who live in the community in a home environ.ment with problematic features and who have physical or mental conditions that complicate these problems or allow the problems to put the person at higher risk of adverse outcomes. Persons who exhibit both of the following conditions: . The home environment has one or more of the following: Lighting problem Flooring or carpeting problem Bathroom or toilet problem еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Kitchen problem Heating or cooling problem Significant disrepair of the home Squalid conditions . The person has two or more of the following indicators of frailty: Not able to climb stairs Less than 2 hours of physical activity in the last 3 days Unsteady gait Poor health Conditions or diseases that make the person unstable Difficult access to the home Difficult access to rooms in the home Depression Rating Scale (DRS) of 3 or higher Any one of three mental-health symptoms: hallucinations, delusions, abnormal thoughts This triggered group includes about 15% of persons receiving home care and 2% of adults living independently in the community. Of those triggered, about one-half will have problems with flooring and bathrooms, while one-quarter or less will have problems in the other areas. NOT TRIGGERED Includes all other persons. This group includes about 85% of persons receiving home care. Home Environment Optimization CAP Guidelines Not all of the environmental conditions covered in this CAP will require immediate intervention. Although some conditions represent clear hazards (for example, an absence of heat in cold weather), others may represent only a slight hazard or may have only a minimal impact on the person's function (for example, high doorsills for those who are restricted to wheelchairs or a squalid condition with excessive hoard.ing). Given these thoughts, the following approaches are relevant. Heating and cooling. A failure to maintain an appropriate temperature in the home can place the person at risk of hypothermia or hyperthermia. When this risk is present, immediate action is needed to correct the problem. . Does the person's medical condition or degree of frailty prohibit him or her from sensing the temperature in the home? . Does the person suffer from a condition that is likely to prevent him or her from performing a basic activity such as setting the thermostat: depression (for example, a DRS score of 3 or higher), severe malnourishment (triggered by the Undernutrition CAP), or excessive daily consumption of alcohol? [See Tobacco and Alcohol Use CAP.] . Is the problem made wo.rse by economic issues? If yes, is there a solution? Does the community have fuel assistance, weatherization, or home modifi.cation programs for low-income homeowners and renters? Is there a relative who could help the person in either managing the heat.ing/cooling or in providing economic assistance with home utilities? Is the person making poor choices (such as spending money on alcohol) or is he or she generally unable to manage his or her own finances? The caregiver, relatives, or friends may be able to provide advice or assistance in designing a more appropriate budget. Lighting. Simple corrective steps are often all that will be needed, including replac.ing burned-out bulbs, increasing bulb wattage, installing night-lights, or providing more lamps. Flooring and carpeting. Some easy strategies to be considered include . Avoid scatter rugs. . Adhere rugs to the floor using double-sided tape. . Use a bath mat with nonskid backing. . Repair loose flooring and holes in the floor or carpet. If the person does not have the money to make repairs, identify others who could help (for example, a volunteer group in the community, a relative, or a church member). . For persons with mobility problems, home modifications including space, width of doorways and hallways, doorsills, ramps, and other safety installa.tions may be warranted. General space requirements. Mobility aids such as wheelchairs and walkers require a significant amount of space within rooms, corridors, and bathrooms to permit independent use. For instance, wheelchairs require a turning radius of 5 feet and wider doorways. Removal of doorsills or doors may be warranted, and furni.ture and room contents may need to be rearranged or removed. Absence of such accommodations is to blame for higher rates of injuries among wheelchair users. Bathroom. About one-half of all serious falls occur in the bathroom. If possible, properly installed permanent hand supports and grab bars should be present, although arranging for installation of such support devices can be difficult. As a first step, identify any community groups that may be willing to help. Also speak with the person and family about their ability to have the support devices installed. Kitchen. Stove-related fires are a critical risk. Preventive measures include using a timer, having another person cook, or cooking only when someone else is present. For persons who have a history of hazardous use of the stove, consider using child.proof knobs, installing a cutoff switch, or shutting down the stove and only using a microwave. . Make sure smoke alarms and fire extinguishers are present, working, and in a known location. Discuss an emergency plan with the person and family, ensuring there is a common strategy in place (for example, emergency alert call system). . Check that necessary safety equipment is within reach and that the placement of the stove does not put it at risk of igniting flammable materials such as cur.tains or of having something fall on the stove, thereby causing a fire. Consider alterations in layout of the kitchen or need for structural modification. . Alternative housing may be necessary if the person lives alone or if it is not possible to make necessary modifications to the home. State of disrepair of the home or squalid conditions. Look for general clutter as well as frayed wiring, overloaded electrical circuits, broken stairs, shattered win.dows, leaky pipes, rat and bug infestation, clogged drains or toilets, pet feces, and old garbage. First try to identify why these conditions exist (for example, cognitive or functional impairment, absence of money, lack of any other place to live) and then offer possible remedial steps. If self-neglect due to depression or mental health issues is the key barrier, notify the person's physician and consider referral for a mental health assessment. Neighborhood. Assessment of safety of the community or neighborhood. Additional Resources AARP Home Design. www.aarp.org/families/home_design/ Berg K, Hines M, Allen SM. 2002. Wheelchair users at home: Few home modifi.cations and many injurious falls.American Journal of Public Health 92: 48. Gitlin LN, Winter L, Dennis MP, Corcoran M, Schinfeld S, Hauck WW. 2006. A randomized trial of a multicomponent home intervention to reduce func.tional difficulties in older adults.JAGS (May) 54(5): 809-16. Misset B, De Jonghe B, Bastuji-Garin S, Gattolliat 0, Boughrara E, Annane D, Hausfater P, Garrouste-Orgeas M, Cadet J. 2006. Mortality of patients with heatstroke admitted to intensive care units during the 2003 heat wave in France: A national multiple-center risk-factor study. Critical Care Medicine (April) 34(4): 1087-92. Van Bemmel T, Vandenbroucke JP, Westendorp RG, Gussekloo J. 2005. In an observational study elderly patients had an increased risk of falling due to home hazards.Journal of Clinical Epidemiology (January) 58(1): 63-67. Authors Catherine Hawes, PhD Brant E. Fries, PhD Dinnus Frijters, PhD Knight Steel, MD Rosemary Bakker, MS John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Katherine Berg, PhD, PT Section 5 Institutional Risk CAP Problem The Institutional Risk CAP identifies persons who have an increased risk of enter.ing a long-term care facility in the coming months. They typically have deficits in physical functioning, memory, decision making, and health. This CAP describes steps to be taken to lessen the likelihood of entering such a facility. Most persons identified for this CAP will remain in the community, receiving informal support mainly from family members and modest supplemental support by formal agencies. However, as the person's problems increase in complexity, so too does the likelihood of entering a long-term care facility. Institutional placement is most likely to occur following a long process of decline. Functional decline typically begins with minor decrements in performing instru.mental AD Ls (for example, cleaning the home or shopping for groceries). Sensing that something is amiss, family and close friends step forward to help compensate for this new loss. This level of assistance may remain the same for a long period of time, as functional decline is often a remarkably slow process. With time, a person may experience additional problems in day-to-day decision making and memory, and eventually develop dependency in one or more basic AD Ls. As the person and others note the loss, informal help increases. The first ADL tasks to require assis.tance are usually personal hygiene and dressing. The onset of behavioral problems may further complicate the situation. Although the person and family are usually able to adapt and adjust levels of assis.tance according to changes in capacity, the person's needs may eventually exceed the capacity of the informal network to provide appropriate support. At this point, the person or key family members believe that entry into a long-term care facility may be in the person's best interests. This may happen after a hospitalization for an acute problem or the flare-up of a recurrent chronic condition. The precipitating event may be a fall, a fracture, pneumonia, or other reason for a prolonged period of inactivity or bed rest. Regardless of the underlying cause, with functional inde.pendence further compromised, the person, family, and discharge personnel may consider a long-term care facility admission. However, for many of these persons, institutional admission will often be avoided with appropriate interventions and community supports. Overall Goal of Care е Avoid premature admission to a long-term care facility by supporting family efforts and providing commw1ity intervention programs. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT Institutional Risk CAP Trigger TRIGGERED NOT TRIGGERED This CAP trigger identifies persons with impaired functioning who are at high risk of institutional placement in the coming months. This group includes persons who have four or more of following conditions: Any stay in a long-term care facility in the past 5 years Short-term memory problems Any deficit in cognitive skills for daily decision making Alzheimer's disease Any limitation in making oneself understood Any limitation in understanding others Any of the following behavioral problems (at any frequency): wandering, verbally abusive, physically abusive, socially inappropriate behavior, inap.propriate public sexual behavior, or resists care Receiving any help in transfer (or did not occur) Receiving any help in locomotion (or did not occur) Receiving any help in personal hygiene (or did not occur) Decline in AD Ls in the prior 90 days Wheeled by others (indoors) Does not go out of the house One or more falls in the last 90 days Occasional, frequent, or daily urinary incontinence This triggered group includes 40% of persons receiving home care and 1 % of older adults living independently in. the community. About 80% of persons newly admit.ted for long-stay care in long-term care facilities will meet this trigger condition. For triggered persons in home care, about 20% will enter a long-term care facility within a year -twice the rate of those not triggered. For triggered older adults liv.ing independently in the community, about 30% will enter a long-term care facility within 1 year -about four times the rate of those not triggered. All other persons. This group accounts for about 60% of persons receiving home care and 88% of older adults living independently in the community. Institutional Risk CAP Guidelines Identifying persons and families who appear ready to make the decision to consider a long-term care facility admission. The following approach may be used to redirect premature decisions to enter a long-term care facility. . For a person in hospital, assess premorbid levels of function and changes in status following the precipitating event. Consider whether there is a reason.able expectation of partial or full recovery. For the vast majority of persons, declines in functional status will be of recent onset and, in the absence of a massive cognitive loss, there is substantial potential for the person to improve and not need institutionalization. For those who were dependent prior to the precipitating event, determinethe level of assistance thatfamily or other care.givers were providing on a routine basis. If there has been a fall, review the Falls CAP. If delirium is present, review the Delirium CAP. If the person is depressed, review the Mood CAP. If there has been a decline in ADLs, review the ADL CAP. If family is distressed and seems not able to continue the informal caregiv.ing, review the Informal Support CAP. . For a person in the community who has not had a recent hospital admission: Assess whether decline is related to any of the following: е Decisions by the family to do more for the person than may be neces.sary (for example, a family member, concerned for the person's safety, may have begun to do things for the person without being asked, or the family member does not have the patience to wait when the person per.forms an activity slowly). е Recent changes in medications may cause the person to slow down. Do not forget to highlight the person's residual strengths. For example, consider his or her capacity to make decisions, ability to walk, positive out.look, love of grandchildren, financial resources, and determination to stay in the community. Ask about any rehabilitation intervention to address previous declines. [See ADL CAP.] Problem solving through other triggered CAPs. For a person considered at high risk of entering a long-term care facility, the goal is to identify those conditions that can be addressed in the community. For someone triggered on this CAP, consider his or her underlying risk of going into a long-term care facility as part of your review of other triggered CAPs. Some of the major CAP problem areas that may be triggered include . ADL decline . Fallsе Cognitive decline . Delirium . Communication declineе Urinary incontinence . Behavior problems The primary task is to ensure that institutional risk status is highlighted, in the above areas, in the plan of care. Knowing that a person is at risk of admission to a long-term care facility should help ensure that identified problems are addressed. Watch for subsequent loss in any of the areas identified in this CAP trigger: ADLs, memory, decision making, communication, falls, behavior, or bladder func.tion. . Identify the new problem or worseningstatus as soon as possible. . Seek to identify changes in health status or care patterns that might explainwhat has happened to the person -a new disease or medication, or a failure to comply with a prescribed course of care. . Consider strategies and education for self-management or family education about managing chronic conditions. Role of family. Most persons will have reasonable family networks that naturally step forward to provide support. . If family members are providing support today, they are likely to continue to perform in this way in the near term at least. As new needs arise, family mem.bers often surprise themselves as they step forward to help their loved one. Nonetheless, it is helpful to provide education to the family and person on self-management strategies, lifestyle changes, and coping strategies, as well as information on expected course of recovery or decline over time. . At the same time, in the rare instance when the person has a poor informal support system, he or she can be expected to receive significantly less help from family and friends. If true today, this will be true tomorrow. Such infor.mal support systems seldom self-correct. In these instances, you should be prepared to arrange for increased levels of formal care. . Many key informal helpers will lack information both on what types of changes to expect for the person being helped and on how they can best respond over time. Programs of individual and group counseling, as well as the dissemina.tion of information (either on a real-time, hot-line basis or through brochures on key facts), may be helpful. . Recognize that the person may suggest going to a long-term care facility or assisted living so as "not to be a burden" on family and loved ones. Often it is an incorrect perception by the person that assistance cannot be continued, especially with additional support of formal care services. Discuss these per.ceptions with the person and his or her informal caregivers. . Periodically planned respite care, including in-home or day care for a few hours at a time, or institutional respite care for days or weeks, may enable informal caregivers to sustain a support role for longer periods of time. Temporary services for urgent problems. When families are severely distressed by the person's new problems, refer them to a social worker or other appropriate professional to identify available formal support resources and housing. Respite care or increases of formal services may be important in keeping the family involved in the care of the person. In other instances, the person may require another housing setting on a temporary basis. This can be due to the absence of a caregiver because of illness or job considerations, or because the person's current residence will no longer be available. In such cases, attention should be directed to why such place.ments are necessary and to helping informal caregivers set sensible expectations about their responsibilities, duties, and preferences once the person returns home. Specialized assisted living housing alternatives. To the extent that such resources are available in a community, specialized housing options can be considered. Assisted living housing (independent apartments with barrier-free features and access to supportive services) can have a significant effect on reducing the need for institutionalization. For impaired persons, including those with some cognitive loss and mild to moderate functional problems, assisted living options can be arranged where a partnership of formal and informal services help support the person. Preventive measures that reduce the risk of events that increase disability. There is increasing evidence that lifestyle measures and medical interventions may reduce the subsequent risk of cardiovascular events or the morbidity arising from them, falls, and further functional decline. Actions that prevent such morbidity also often can reduce the likelihood of needing institutionalization. Additional Resources Barusha AJ, PandavR, Shen C, Dodge HH, Ganguli M. 2004. Predictors of nursing facility admission: A 12-year epidemiological study in the United States.JAGS 52: 434-39. Laukkanen P, Leskinen E, Kauppinen M, Sakari-Rantala R, Heikkinen E. 2000. Health and functional capacity as predictors of community dwelling among elderly people. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 53:257-65. Payette H, Coulombe C, Boutier V, Gray-Donald K. 2000. Nutrition risk factors for institutionalization in a free-living functionally dependent elderly popula.tion. Journal ofClinical Epidemiology 53: 579-87. Soto ME, Andrieu S, Gillette-Guyonnet S, Cantet C, Nourhasheni F, Vellas B. 2006. Risk factors for functional decline and institutionalisation among com.munity-dwelling older adults with mild to severe Alzheimer's disease: One year of follow-up. Age and Ageing35(3): 308-10. Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Jean-Claude Henrard, MD Brant E. Fries, PhD Section 6 Physical Restraints CAP Problem This CAP identifies persons who are physically restrained. A restraint is any device (for example, a physical or mechanical device, material, or equipment attached or adjacent to the person's body) that the person cannot easily remove and that restricts freedom of movement or normal access to his or her body. What is impor.tant is the effect the device has on the person, not the purpose for which the device was placed on the person. This also includes the use of passive restraints such as chairs that prevent rising. The goal of this CAP is to eliminate the use of restraints by employing appropriate measures as necessary according to the person's physical and/ or cognitive abilities. Physical restraints are associated with negative physical and psychosocial out.comes. They are almost never indicated, and at most should be used only as a short.term temporary intervention. If used for any significant period of time, the physical consequences may include loss of muscle mass, contractures, lessened mobility and stamina, impaired balance, skin breakdown, constipation, and incontinence. Fur.ther, persons who try to free themselves from restraints may fall and be injured. There is even a high risk of strangulation when certain types of restraints are used. The psychosocial effects of restraint use may include a feeling of shame, hopeless.ness, and stigmatization as well as agitation. Behavior disturbances that are some.times the excuse for restraint use may even be aggravated. It is sometimes suggested that restraints be used because of staffing shortages. However, there is considerable evidence that the use of restraints increases demands on staff because it is neces.sary to check the person's status more often than usual throughout the day, and there may be a decline in physical and mental health as well. Overall Goals of Care е Identify and treat symptoms related to use of physical restraints. е Identify and carry out alternative ca.re approaches (for example, restorative care, alternative seating/positioning, incLividualized activities, or constanl monitoring by staff/volunteer). е Evaluate the use of alternative meLhods and outcomes in an ongoing manner. Physical Restraints CAP Trigger This CAP applies to persons in. long-term care facilities and post acute care settings. This CAP does not apply to persons in home care or other community settings. The Physical Restraints CAP identifies two types of persons for follow-up, using interRAl's ADL Self-Performance Hierarchy Scale. Both groups will be restrained in their movement at the time of assessment by devices such as trunk restraints or chairs that prevent rising. The groups differ in their ADL self-performance status: One group is more self-engaged in ADLs, while the other group has little indepen.dence in these activities. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT TRIGGERED TO REMOVE RESTRAINTS FOR PERSONS WITH THE ABILITY TO PERFORM SOME MIDDLE-OR EARLY-LOSS AOL ACTIVITIES (for example, personal hygiene, dressing, and walking) Persons in this subgroup tend to be restrained because of concerns about falling, wandering, and behavioral problems (for example, resisting care, physical abuse, or socially inappropriate behavior). About one in five restrained persons will fall into this group. Organizations with effective restraint reduction programs have been able to eliminate restraints in caring for such persons. This group includes 1 % of persons in long-term care facilities and 2% of persons receiving home care. TRIGGERED TO REMOVE RESTRAINTS FOR PERSONS WITH LITTLE OR NO ABILITY TO PERFORM MIDDLE-OR EARLY-LOSS ADLs Persons in this subgroup are more likely to have a history of falls and behavioral problems than the subgroup not triggered. About 70% of these persons have severe cognitive loss and a like number are unable to walk or use a wheelchair. About 40% will be unable to sit upright on their own, over one-quarter will have severe prob.lems in seeing or understanding others, and about 15% will be tube fed. With effec.tive restraint reduction programs, few, if any, such persons will require restraints. This group includes 1 to 6% of persons in long-term care facilities and less than 1 % of persons receiving home care. NOT TRIGGERED This group includes persons who do not use physical restraints or a chair that pre.vents rising. In addition, persons with quadriplegia and those who are comatose are not triggered. Their plan of care would call for the use of proper chairs and support apparatuses. Physical Restraints CAP Guidelines Initial Considerations Prior to Temporary Use of a Physical Restraint There are a limited number of situations where a physical restraint may need to be applied on an emergency basis. An example would be to prevent violence to others, harm to self, or a suicide attempt (consult facility psychiatric practice standards for such emergency use), or to allow an essential medical treatment to proceed. As soon as the immediate concern passes, the person must be evaluated for removal of the restraint and referred for care as described below. When consideration is being given to the use of a physical restraint at other times, first complete a thorough assessment to consider care approaches that do not involve restraint use. The following are examples of issues to consider: . Seating-Does the person need a different type of seat? Often, restraints are misused as positioning devices. Consider an assessment by a therapist to determine the most suitable seat.ing apparatus given the person's physical condition. When a wheelchair is used for transport only, encourage the person to move to other chairs for more permanent seating during the day. This would not necessarily apply to a wheelchair that has been customized for that person (for example, having tilt/recline, custom back). Such a wheelchair is often the most appropriate seating as compared to standard furniture. Provide access to as many types of seating as reasonable for that person to allow for a change in posture and perhaps a different environment. . Ambulation, transfers, and positioning -What is the person's daily rou.tine? This review may point to ways to individualize the current living envi.ronment to reduce the risk of falling by providing the person with the nec.essary help for transfers, ambulation, or position changes before the person would try such moves unassisted. Consider the times of both day and night when interventions other than restraints can reduce the risk of adverse out.comes. Consider the usual time the person gets out of bed, uses the toilet, is involved in activities, eats meals, rests in bed, and sleeps. Are there opportunities for the person to be repositioned without restraints during meals, activities, and at other times? Does the person use suitable adaptive equipment, including canes and walkers, for mobility? Has the person been trained (if appropriate) and monitored on the proper use of the adaptive equipment? Does the person have suitable nonskid, well-fitting footwear? For persons already in restraints, determine the reason for their use. If, after this review, the decision is made to temporarily continue using a physical restraint, the person's plan of care must identify the following: . A detailed rationale for use of the restraint. . The specific time(s) the restraint(s) is (are) to be used and a detailed schedule for checking the status of the person when it is. Such a schedule will specify the frequency of checking by hour and day. For example, one such plan would call for the person to be checked every 15 minutes for the first 2 days and every hour for the following 5 days. . Monitor the person's physical and emotional response to the restraint (for example, assess for agitation, calling out, pulling at the restraint, tearfulness). . Determine the presence of the person's consent (or proxy consent if the per.son is not capable to provide consent) for the restraint use. . Design a plan outlining steps to eliminate the use of the restraint as soon as possible. . Establish a target date by which the restraint will be removed. If this date has passed, re-evaluate in detail the need for restraint use and document the rea.sons it was not removed by the target date. Considerations Following Application ofa Physical Restraint Is the person restrained because of a history of falling? [ Consult the Falls CAP for a more detailed discussion of falls.] If this is the case, there are two main actions: (1) develop a list of the conditions that may place the person at an increased risk of falling; and (2) develop alternative care strategies for each of the applicable condi.tions identified in the following section. Restraints are never a correct strategy to address these conditions. The following is a list of common conditions that call for nonrestraint solutions. . High-risk clinical factors suggesting that severe injury might result should a fall occur. Examples include osteoporosis; severe visual impairment; antico.agulation therapy including wafarin, heparin, or aspirin; recent hip fracture; and a recent episode of syncope. . Functional limitations that suggest a fall would have a higher likelihood of a serious consequence-for example, the presence of a significant limitation in locomotion or transferring. [See the ADL CAP.] . Would the person benefit from an exercise or rehabilitation program to improve underlying conditions? Examples include strength training to improve muscle tone, aerobic exercise to increase cardiovascular stamina, and gait and balance training to increase steadiness. Is the person restrained because of a history of wandering behavior?Restraints are rarely indicated for such behavior and even then only for a matter of a few min.utes under most circumstances. Many techniques and devices are now available to address this issue. Alert devices can be placed on the person so that a door auto.matically locks when the person approaches. Identification bracelets, such as Medi.cal Alert, can be placed on the person for prompt identification. Circular paths that do not have an exit outside may allow the person to walk without being able to leave the building. [See the Behavior CAP for more details on how to address the care of such persons.] . Does the person wander because of an abnormal cognitive state (for example, short-term memory impairment, impaired cognitive skills for decision mak.ing, variations in mental function over the course of the day)? Assess and treat reversible cognitive problems. [See Delirium CAP, Cognitive CAP.] . Is the person able to make him-or herself understood and can he or she understand others? Note clarity of speech and the person's ability to give and to understand directions and conversation. Provide different forms of com.munication/ directions as needed (for example, wall signs that redirect the person). [See Communication CAP.] . Determine if the person.s need to move could be satisfied through purposeful activity, such as participation in a walking program. . Determine if there are patterns to wandering or behavior disturbances. Con.sider what is motivating the person. Consider the time of day and build a routine around the need to wander. Consider the person's prior routine to identify possible activities the person might want to pursue. . Determine if wandering or behavior disturbances may be a side effect of a medication. [See Behavior CAP.] . Has the person recently moved into the facility? Is the person trying to deal with loss or fear of the unknown? The care approach should include strategies to make the person feel safe, comfortable, and secure in the care environment. Is the person restrained because of agitated or abusive behaviors? [ Consult the Behavior CAP for a more detailed discussion of behavior management.] . Does the person have a history of a psychiatric diagnosis? Review the person's medication regimen to ensure that correct medications are being used. . Determine whether the behavior is the result of an unmet need in a non.behavioral area (for example, pain/discomfort, fatigue, hunger, thirst, fear, bowel/bladder need, boredom or overstimulation, need to move around), and design alternative strategies to meet such needs. . Is the abusive behavior new? Because an acute medical condition can result in delirium or an acute psychotic episode associated with striking behavioral change, immediate referral to a physician is required if this is a consideration. [See Delirium CAP.] . Identify any precipitating factor( s), remove them from the environment if pos.sible, and adjust care schedules to reflect the person's unique needs. Examples of treatment strategies include Allow the person to decide to get up in the morning or be bathed. Redirect the person with calm, simple, clear, and reassuring directions and remove environmental hazards and other persons from the immediate vicinity. Allow the person to safely express his or her emotions. Provide one-on-one intervention/supervision, as tolerated by the person. Many persons who are agitated and pacing may be willing to be accompa.nied by a staff member while verbally releasing their anger and frustration. Avoid speaking in loud, forceful, or urgent tones that may further irritate the person. If the person is being physically abusive, move away and allow the person to have space. This will decrease the person's sense of feeling trapped. Remove others from the situation. When it seems safe, approach the person in a calm, reassuring manner. . Was abusive behavior toward another person provoked or unprovoked? Iden.tification of provoking factors will aid in determining a suitable plan to pre.vent future abusive behavior toward others. Examples of treatment strategies include the following: If the person wandered into another's room, a harsh response by the occu.pant may make the wanderer strike out (behavior provoked). If the abuse was not a result of provocation, consider an immediate referral to a physician while beginning immediate steps to maintain safety of staff and other persons. Approach the person in a calm, quiet, soothing manner. A person often mirrors the behavior of those around him or her. Consider the physical environment and decide if overstimulation or under.stimulation may be factors that affect abusive outbursts. Proper interven.tions may include, but are not limited to, adjusting awakening and retiring schedules, adapting meal times, providing one-on-one activities and varia.tions in current activity schedules, adjustment of medications, and referral for medical or psychiatric evaluation and intervention. Take steps to improve the continuity of care (for example, use a primary nursing care approach). ls one staff member assigned to the same personover long periods of time to build up an understanding of his or her indi.vidual strengths, preferences, needs, and idiosyncrasies? A sense of famil.iarity with a consistent caregiver may reduce and even eliminate periods of abusive behavior. Is the person restrained to prevent the removal of an essential medical device (for example, IV tube or tracheostomy tube)? . What is the person communicating by trying to remove a medical device? Could it be localized pain at a tube insertion site that could be corrected? Did the person express wishes to not have a tube before it was inserted? Is the person trying to convey his or her wishes? Consider discussions with the per.son, family, and health care team to review the goals of care and the person's wishes about health care treatments. . ls a family member able to spend time with the person to calm and reassure him or her? . If a device is considered necessary, interventions to distract the person from pulling at it include the following: Dress the person in a long-sleeved shirt to cover tubing in the arm. Dress the person in long pants with a leg bag to discourage pulling at an indwelling catheter. Dress the person in a turtleneck shirt to keep him or her from reaching for a subclavian line. Offer the person something to hold to occupy his or her hands (for exam.ple, putty, a foam ball, rosary beads, a clean piece of tubing, or a personal possession small enough to hold). Invite the person to attend activities that keep the person actively involved. Arrange for a sitter or a video monitor. . If treatment is temporary (for example, IV antibiotics) and the above alter.natives do not work, consider the least restrictive form of restraint, closely monitor the person, and devise a plan to remove the restraint as soon as pos.sible. Additional Resources "Everyone wins! Quality care without restraints:' 1995. The Independent Production Fund, in association with Toby Levine Communications, Inc., New York, NY. Tideiksaar, R. 1998. Preventing falls, avoiding restraints. Untie the Elderly news.letter. (September) 10(2). "Untie the elderly:' The Kendal Corporation, PO Box 100, Kennett Square, PA 19348. www.ute.kendal.org Williams CC, Burger SG, Murphy K. 1997. Restraint reduction. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. Authors Beryl D. Goldman, PhD, RN Neil Beresin, MEd, BA Janet Davis, BA, ACC Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD Brant E. Fries, PhD John P. Hirdes, PhD Karen Russell, LPN Sara Wright, MSN, GNP Katharine M. Murphy, PhD, RN John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Knight Steel, MD Cognition/Mental Health CAPs ! 7. Cognitive Loss CAP 8. Delirium CAP 9. Communication CAP 10. Mood CAP 11. Behavior CAP 12. Abusive Relationship CAP Section 7 Cognitive Loss CAP Problem The cognitive hallmarks of an independent life include the ability to remember recent events and the ability to make safe daily decisions. The aging process may be associated with mild impairment. Otherwise, the decline in cognition is likely the result of other factors such as delirium, a mental health problem, a mass lesion, a stroke, a metabolic condition, or dementia. Dementia is not a unique disease, but a syndrome. It may be linked to several causes. According to DSM-IV-TR, the dementia syndrome is defined by the pres.ence of three criteria:* . a short-term memory problem, . and trouble with at least one cognitive function (abstract thought, judgment, orientation, language, behavior, personality change, and so on), . and these troubles have an impact on the performance of daily life activities. Declining or worsening cognitive abilities threaten personal independence and increase the risk for long-term care facility admission. Whatever the reason for cognitive decline, care based on a proper diagnosis is necessary for proper plan.ning. Overall Goals of Care е Optimize the ability to perform activities of dai]y living and to live an active social life. е Prevent further cognitive and physical decline. е Supporl safe and independent decision making. Cognitive Loss CAP Trigger This CAP focuses on helping persons with reasonable cognitive skills, character.ized by a CPS score of2 or lower (corresponding to a Mini-Mental State Examina.tion [MMSE] score of 19 or higher), to remain as independent as possible, for as long as possible. It triggers for focused care planning the subgroup of persons who are at higher risk oflosing their retained cognitive abilities. These persons will have, or will be at risk of having, a form of dementia. Loss of instrumental or basic activi.ties of daily living (ADL) function, in the absence of a physical illness, should raise еToe notion of decline and chronicity should also be considered: (1) if there is a decline but without the pres.ence of the three criteria together that are described above, one can talk of cognitive impairment or cognitive loss; (2) if the troubles are not chronic but fluctuating, a delirium is more probably involved. еееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееееT suspicion of emerging cognitive impairment. Therefore, careful observation of a person's performance of these activities over time may provide an important clue to suggest the presence of cognitive decline. TRIGGERED TO PREVENT DECLINE This group includes persons who exhibit both of the following: . Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS) score of 0, 1, or 2 (equivalent to a MMSE of 19 or higher), and . The presence of two or more of the following clinical risk factors for cognitive decline: Alzheimer's disease Dementia other than .Alzheimer's disease Sometimes or never/rarely able to understand others Sometimes or never/rarely able to make self understood Repetitive daily complaints or concerns Repetitive questions Repetitive daily verbalization that something bad is about to happen Wandering Physically abusive New indications of being easily distracted-this element is not assessed in RAI-HC New episodes of altered perception -this element is not assessed in RAI-HC New episodes of disorganized speech -this element is not assessed in RAI-HC New periods of restlessness -this element is not assessed in RAI-HC New periods ofrlethargyr-this element is not assessed in RAI-HC New indication that mental function varies over the course of the day (sudden change in mental function) Declining cognitive status over the past 90 days ( or worsening decision making as compared to status of 90 days ago is different than declining cognitive status over the past 90 days)* Increased care needs over the past 90 days (in P6-CS ask participants to remove "receives more support" in code 2 and tell them to focus on the word "deterioration") Six or fewer months to live These persons have early indications of cognitive problems and are at a higher risk of declining further in the near future. This group includes about 5% of persons in long-term care facilities, 10% of persons receiving home care, and less than 1 % of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care facility set.ting, about 25% of the persons triggered into this group will experience a decline in cognition over a 90-day period (with proportional declines in memory and inde.pendence in daily decision making). The rate of decline in home care is about 16%. 'This parenthetical criteria applies whenthe loneliness item is not available on the instrument. TRIGGERED TO MONITOR FOR RISK OF COGNITIVE DECLINE This group includes persons who exhibit both of the following: . Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS) score of 0, 1, or 2 (equivalent to a MMSE score of 19 or higher), and . The presence of none or only one of the previously mentioned risk factors for cognitive decline (listed under "Triggered to prevent decline"). These persons tend to decline as they subsequently acquire two or more of the risk factors. The approach to care for these persons is to observe their performance for the onset of these factors. This group includes about 35% of persons in long-term care facilities, 75% of persons receiving home care, and 98% of older adults living independently in the community. In a long-term care home setting, about 13% of the persons triggered into this group will tend to decline in cognitive performance over a 90-day period. The rate of decline in home care tends to be about 10%. NOT TRIGGERED Includes all persons with a Cognitive Performance Scale (CPS) score of 3 or higher (equivalent to a MMSE score lower than 19). This group includes about 60% of persons in long-term care facilities, 15% of persons receiving home care, and 1% of older adults living independently in the community. In both long-term care facility and home care settings, only about 8% of persons in this group tend to experience a decline in cognitive performance over a 90-day period. Cognitive Loss CAP Guidelines Initial DiagnosticWorkup When There Is No Dementia Diagnosis Present It is possible for a person to be in the early stages of dementia, even though the CPS score is low. If there is suspicion of cognitive impairment, it is recommended that further evaluation be completed and referrals put in place. In cases where the infor.mation provided by the person or family members is unclear, it may be necessary to consult the physician directly. Persons without a known diagnosis of dementia should be considered for referral to a physician for further assessment when . The CPS score is 1 or 2 or O but there is other evidence of cognitive impair.ment (for example, a recent cognitive loss). In such a case, persons who do not have a proper explanation for their decline in cognition function should have a comprehensive medical evaluation to rule out (or in) treatable reasons for cognitive impairment and to identify optimal medications. . Other evidence of cognitive impairment includes the symptoms listed in the "clinical risk factors" referenced under the triggers. It might also include reduced performance in instrumental and basic AD Ls that is not explained by a physical illness or impairment. If the need for assistance is still unclear, consult a physician. Review the person's clinical records and most recent interRAI assessments for possible reasons, other than impaired cognition, that are contributing to this need for assistance in ADLs. These might include Physiological disorders, for example: . Musculoskeletal diseases . Neurological diseases . Post-trauma conditions Factors associated with lifestyle and adopted habits, for example: . Excessive use of alcohol . Use of psychotropic medications [see Appropriate Medications CAP] . Household roles (for example, in many relationships, partners may assume responsibilities for specific tasks such as housekeeping and managing finances) If the need for assistance is still unclear, consult a physician. Even if a reasonable explanation for impaired performance is found, continue to observe for signs of declining cognition or physical performance. However, all persons with a CPS of 1 or 2 who do not have a proper explanation should have a comprehensive medical evaluation to rule out (or in) treatable rea.sons for cognitive impairment: and to identify optimal medications. The assessment follow-up may range from a single consultation with a physician to a comprehensive process involving neuropsychological testing, haematologic investigations, and brain imaging. Look for Reversible Causes of Cognitive Loss Almost any new medication can have a negative impact on cognition. [See Appro.priate Medications CAP.] Some types of cognitive loss, such as those due to low levels of serum vitamin B12, disorders in calcium metabolism or thyroid function, or excessive use of alco.holic beverages, may be reversible. For those triggered to prevent cognitive decline, review the following clinical risk factors for possible links to subsequent cognitive loss. Signs of fluctuating cognitive status. Delirium, or acute confusion, is a poten.tially reversible condition. However, it can result in the wrong impression about the nature of the person's typical or usual cognitive limitation. Improved cognitive performance can be expected in many persons as delirium resolves. [See Delirium CAP.] For persons with a diagnosis of any dementing disease, assess for signs of declining cognitive performance. . Caregivers should be asked to identify potentially reversible causes (otherthan the dementia-causing disease itself) for recent losses in cognitive sta.tus. The actions of caregivers and family may overly compensate for a modest decline in function. The goal is to allow the person to make maximal use of retained cognitive abilities in daily life. It would be incorrect to assume that recent loss of this type is not reversible. . Identifying these changes can heighten caregiver awareness of the person's cognitive and functional limitations, while offering an opportunity to re.engage the person in making decisions and performing everyday activities of daily life. Knowledge of cognitive decline will help others develop practical expectations of the person's capabilities and aid in designing approaches to maximize the person's involvement in making daily decisions. Are there behavioral symptoms (for example, wandering or physical abuse of others) that interfere with daily life, care delivery, or activities involvement? [See Behavior CAP.] . Specific treatments for behavioral problems and treatments for delirium may effectively address these conditions and improve cognitive capabilities. [See Delirium CAP and Behavior CAP.] . Pain has a negative impact on cognition. Pain in persons with impaired cogni.tion can also cause behavioral problems, irritability, and function loss. [See Pain CAP.] . Some behavior problems will not be reversible. [See Behavior CAP.] If this is the case, and the behaviors occur daily, another environment for the per.son might be appropriate. However, in the mild stages of cognitive impair.ment, the person should be able to make many of his or her own life decisions, including where to live. . Some behavior problems may pose no threat to the person's safety, health, or activity pattern or the safety of others and do not require intervention. But if there is a temporal relationship between behavior and cognitive decline, con.sider treating the behavior. The following issues may be considered: Have cognitive skills declined after beginning a behavior management pro.gram (for example, psychotropic drugs)? Is the decline due to the treatment program (for example, a side effect of a drug)? Have cognitive skills improved following the onset of a behavioral manage.ment program? Has caregiver help strengthened the person's self-performance patterns? Does the person suffer from symptoms of depression? . Depressive symptoms may cause a cognitive decline that is mistakenly inter.preted as dementia. [See Mood CAP.] Are there other medical problems? . Identifying and treating other medical problems may improve cognitive func.tioning and a person's quality of life. For example, therapy for congestive heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease may lead to functional and cognitive improvement, while conditions such as chronic liver disease and renal failure can cause or worsen a cognitive loss. These conditions are almost always under a physician's care. Thus, if the person begins to experience a new cognitive loss, discuss with the physician the possibility of a relationship to these conditions or a new or changed treatment for them. . An increase in pain can lead to decreased involvement in functional activities, and this mistakenly may be assumed to indicate cognitive decline. [See Pain CAP.] Can the person communicate effectively with others? Many persons suffering from cognitive deficits seem incapable of full meaningful communication. As a result, seemingly incomprehensible behaviors (for example, screaming) may repre.sent a person's only form of communication. [See Communication CAP.] Be certain that the failure to communicate effectively is not due to hearing impairment or a neurological deficit (for example, aphasia). . Speak with the caregiver and family about the best methods of communicat.ing with the person. Sometimes it will be these individuals who best under.stand how to make contact with the person; in other instances, they will need help in adopting a new approach for the person who has recently declined. . Is the person willing or able to engage in meaningful communication? . Does the caregiver use nonverbal communication techniques (for example, touch, gesture) to encourage the person to respond? Reviewthe person's medication record for drug(s) that might affect cognition. Consider a discussion with the physician or a referral to a consulting pharmacist to aid in this review. . Many medications, particularly psychoactive drugs, may cause cognitivedecline. [See Appropriate Medications CAP.] . A person may show a sudden decline in cognitive function because a drug has been either started or stopped. A thorough review of the medication record, including both prescribed and over-the-counter drugs, will help to identify any recent change in drug consumption practice. . Some medications may be marginally helpful in preventing a decline in cog.nitive status in some people with Alzheimer's disease. If these medications are not being taken, or have never been tried, discuss this option with the physician. . Be alert for evidence of chronic or acute alcohol ingestion or the use of street drugs. . Be alert for the use of herbal remedies or alternative medications the person might be taking. Continued Involvement in Daily Life Are there opportunities for independent activity? Decline in one functional area neither signals the need for the caregiver to assume full responsibility in that area nor should it be interpreted as an indication of a definitive decline in other areas. Review information in the assessment while considering the following issues: . Are there factors that suggest the person can be more involved in his or her care (for example, instances of greater self-performance; wish to do more independently; retained ability to learn; retained control over trunk, limbs, or hands)? . Can the person participate more in decisions about daily life? . Does the person retain any cognitive ability that would allow greater involve.ment in decision making? . Is the person passive? . Does the person resist care? . Are activities broken into manageable subtasks? What is the extent and rate of change of the person's functionalabilities?Func.tional changes are often the :first indicators of cognitive decline and suggest the need to identify reversible causes. [See IADL CAP and ADL CAP.] Consider the following: . To what extent is the person dependent in locomotion, dressing, and eating? . Are there problems with standing balance and risk for falls? [See Falls CAP.] . Could the person be more independent with appropriate cueing or restorative programming? . Nutritional status and weight loss are associated with decline in physical func.tion and may prevent physical improvement. [See ADL CAP and Undernutri.tion CAP.] . Would an appropriate referral prevent further decline? What is the person's extent of continued involvement in ADLs and daily life? Programs focused on physical and social aspects of the person's life can sometimes lessen the disruptive symptoms of cognitive decline. Consider the following: . Can adjusting task demands or the environmental circumstances under which tasks are carried out be helpful? . Are small group programs encouraged? . Are special environmental stimuli present (for example, directional markers, special lighting, color coding)? . Do caregivers regularly help the person in ways that permit him or her to maintain or attain the highest level of functioning? For example, are verbal reminders, physical cues, and supervision regularly provided to aid in carry.ing out AD Ls; are AOL tasks presented in segments to give the person enough time to respond to cues;: and is assistance provided in a pleasant and encour.aging manner? . Has the person experienced a recent loss of someone close (for example, the death of a spouse, a change in the primary caregiver, a recent move to a more dependent living environment, or decreased visiting by family and friends)? Is the person experiencing a failure to thrive?There is a point at which the accu.mulated health and neurological problems of cognitively impaired persons can place them at an elevated risk of complications (for example, pressure ulcers) as well as death. As this disability approaches, review the following: . Do emotional, social, or environmental factors play key roles in the manage.ment of these problems? . If a person is not eating, to what can it be attributed? Examples include a reversible mood problem, a negative reaction to the physical and social envi.ronment in which eating activity occurs, or a neurological deficit such as the loss of hand coordination that might be overcome with specially designed utensils. . Can an identified problem be corrected through caregiver education, a trial of antidepressant medication, referral to occupational therapy (OT) for training, or a counseling program? . If a cause cannot be identified, what clinical conditions may be reversible or preventable as death approaches (for example, fecal impaction, pain, and pressure ulcers)? What interventions could prevent, or at least decrease, the likelihood of such complications? Persons with developmental disabilities. Increasing numbers of persons with developmental disabilities live longer lives. Some may develop dementia as theyage. With declining cognition, families and other caregivers may have to adjust the living environment or other aspects of the person's life to help him or her live as independently as possible. Note that many of the above guidelines also are helpful when care planning for those with a CPS score of 3 or higher. Additional Resources Mace N, Morris JN, Lombardo NE, Perls T. 1997. Cognitive loss. In Morris JN, Lipsitz LA, Murphy KM, Belleville-Taylor P, eds. Quality care in the nursing home. St. Louis, MO: Mosby. The Web site maintained by the Alzheimer's Association (www.alz.org) is an excel.lent resource. It contains much information, including lists of recent articles, books, and videos, a summary of tips for caregivers, and links to many other Web sites (such as www.alzheimer.ca). Authors John N. Morris, PhD, MSW Harriet Finne-Soveri, MD, PhD Katharine M. Murphy, PhD, RN Knight Steel, MD Pauline Belleville-Taylor, RN, MS, CS 